
================================================
Read macros from: /Users/.fldigi/macros/macros.mdf
================================================
xÂ­Ã…^   Ãˆ zFlt iv   ix x e_ttSt`Ã¦ itiZrnewrun tReading Psalms -/Luther cJ Psalteiy Individual Family Devotions Martin Luther
CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE  SAINT LOUIS  This edition  2007 Concordia Publishing House 3558 S. Jefferson Ave.. St
Louis, Mo 63118-3968 1-800-325-3040  www.cph.org Originally published as Psalms with Introductions b Martin Luther  1993
Concordia Publishing House All rights reserved Unless specifically noted, no part of this publication may be repro duced. stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any lorm or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of Concordia Publishing House Introducuons translated by Bruce A Cameron Scripture
quotations arc from The Holy Bible, English Standard Version Copyright  2001 hy Crossway Bibles, a publishing ministry of
Good News Publishers, Wheaton, Illinois. Used by permission. All rights reserved Hymn texts with the abbreviation LSB are
from Lutheran Service Book, copyright  2006 Concordia Publishing House. All rights reserved. Singing of the Psalms" on p. 12.
with the exception of the discussion of the Gtona Patn. is from Lutheran Service Book.  2006 Concordia Publishing House
Schedule of the Psalms for Daily Prayer" on p. 362 is from Lutheran Worship  Altar Book, copynght  2006 Concordia Publishing
House Manufactured in the United Stales of America Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Bible O.T Psalms
English New International 1993 Psalms / with introductions by Martin Luther  introductions translated by Bruce A. Cameron.
ISBN 0-570-04623-8 I Bible. O.T. Psalms-Cntcism.mtcrpreution. etc. 1 Cameron. Bruce A 11 LuttoMarttn. U8MU6 Summancn
uebcrd,e Psalment. English 1993 BS1422 1993b 223' 205208-dc20 93-31311  2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 16 L5 14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07
he Psalier ought to be a dear and beloved book, if only because n promises Christ's death and resurrection so clearly and so
depicts His kingdom and the condition and nature of all Chnstendom that we may call it a little Bible. Most beautifully and briefly
it embraces everything in the entire Bible it is made into a fine enchiridion, or handbook Therefore it seems to me that the Holy
Spint wanted to take the trouble of compiling a short Bible and a book of examples of all Chns tendom or of all saints, with this
purpose in mind that whoever could not read the whole Bible would here haveJEd?i1xxt} Â»dR iutatz oeaiZe he etfeaaimbDyL
ep2iwk Aznt a a= tl wruneReading Psalms -/Luther cJ Psalteiy Individual Family Devotions Martin Luther CONCORDIA
PUBLISHING HOUSE  SAINT LOUIS  This edition  2007 Concordia Publishing House 3558 S. Jefferson Ave.. St Louis, Mo
63118-3968 1-800-325-3040  www.cph.org Originally published as Psalms with Introductions b Martin Luther  1993 Concordia
Publishing House All rights reserved Unless specifically noted, no part of this publication may be repro duced. stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any lorm or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of Concordia Publishing House Introducuons translated by Bruce A Cameron Scripture
quotations arc from The Holy Bible, English Standard Version Copyright  2001 hy Crossway Bibles, a publishing ministry of
Good News Publishers, Wheaton, Illinois. Used by permission. All rights reserved Hymn texts with the abbreviation LSB are
from Lutheran Service Book, copyright  2006 Concordia Publishing House. All rights reserved. Singing of the Psalms" on p. 12.
with the exception of the discussion of the Gtona Patn. is from Lutheran Service Book.  2006 Concordia Publishing House
Schedule of the Psalms for Daily Prayer" on p. 362 is from Lutheran Worship  Altar Book, copynght  2006 Concordia Publishing
House Manufactured in the United Stales of America Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Bible O.T Psalms
English New International 1993 Psalms / with introductions by Martin Luther  introductions translated by Bruce A. Cameron.
ISBN 0-570-04623-8 I Bible. O.T. Psalms-Cntcism.mtcrpreution. etc. 1 Cameron. Bruce A 11 LuttoMarttn. U8MU6 Summancn
uebcrd,e Psalment. English 1993 BS1422 1993b 223' 205208-dc20 93-31311  2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 16 L5 14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07
he Psalier ought to be a dear and beloved book, if only because n promises Christ's death and resurrection so clearly and so
depicts His kingdom and the condition and nature of all Chnstendom that we may call it a little Bible. Most beautifully and briefly
it embraces everything in the entire Bible it is made into a fine enchiridion, or handbook Therefore it seems to me that the Holy
Spint wanted to take the trouble of compiling a short Bible and a book of examples of all Chns tendom or of all saints, with this
purpose in mind that whoever could not read the whole Bible would here have practically an entire sum mary of it. compnsed in
one booklet. . . . The Psalter is the book of all saints, and everyone, whatever his situation may be. finds psalms and words in it
that fit his situation and apply to his case so exactly that it seems they were put in this way only for his sake. . .. Ewald M Plasv
Whai Luihrr Sow (Si Louis Concordia. IdVJi. Ift7 Contents Preface 9 Singing the Psalms 12 Luthers Introduction 14 The Psalms
16 Categories of the Psalms 357 Schedule of Psalms for the Daily Office 358 Schedule of Psalms for Daily Prayer 362 Preface v
Marlin Luther loved the Psalter. It was his daily prayer book as a monk, the topic of his initial lectures as a profes sor. and an
important part of his piety. The first book he offered for publication was a translation and explanation of the seven penitential
psalms (6. 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, 143). By the time Luther completed his German translation of the Bible, he had published six
separate editions of the Psalter. His lectures and commentaries on the Psalms also fill five volumes in the American Edition of
Luther's Works. In all his writings, however, Luther prepared only one work that commented on all 150 psalms. This work, The
Summaries of the Psalms , /5i7, was published in 1532 and again in 1533 as a companion for his final comprehensive revision
of the Psalter (1531). With his short introductions to the psalms, Luther allows us a glimpse into his theology and into his prayer
life. He shows that he understood the Psalter as a Christ-centered book and shows how he prayed each psalm as a Christian
prayer. Luthers Summaries demonstrate his twofold approach to the psalms. First, he classifies each as a psalm of prophe cy,
instruction, comfort, prayer, or thanksor some combi nation of the above. For Luther, the psalms carried their content beyond the
original writer and original setting. They are words of prophecy, instruction, comfort, prayer, and thanks for us today. Second,
Luther assigns each psalm to one of the Ten Commandments and to one of the petitions of the Lords Prayer. He says that the
psalms belong to, flow from, or even are in these petitions and Commandments. In actual practice, he related nearly all the
psalms to the first three 9 Reading the Psalms with Luther Commandmentshaving one God, honoring His name, hearing His
Wordand to the first three petitionscon cerning Gods name, His kingdom, and His will. The other Commandments and petitions
merely fill out what these first three express. Luther discontinued this second classifi cation scheme after Psalm 31. In a long
comment at that point, he declares that the reader has seen enough examples to understand the insight that the psalmist and
every Christian can find in the Ten Commandments and the Lords Prayer. Luthers approach to the psalms is notable, particularl
y because it is Christ centered. For him. all aspects of Christian life, including the psalms, relate to Christ. Even the psalmists
down-to-earth requests for protection and thanks for deliverance Luther applied to his own circum stances and life as a Christian
. The psalmists asked for blessings and gave thanks for blessings as members of the covenant people of God, relying on Gods
grace, trusting His promises, worshiping in His temple, receiving His for giveness. Yet all of thesecovenant, grace, promise, tem
ple, forgivenessfound their fulfillment in Jesus Christ. Christ is Himself the God whom we are exhorted to wor ship. When the
psalmist exults that Gods love endures forever, Luther responds that Christ stands hidden in that phrase. The Old Testament
psalms not only permit us to see Chnst in them, they require it Resurrection, eternity, a uni versal kingdom, forgiveness, even
grace and blessing each ultimately has its home and its fulfillment in Jesus Chnst. To be faithful to the witness of the New
Testament an to the witness of the psalms themselves is to find Christ throughout the Psalter. Christ fulfills its promises and com
fort with His life He tnvites to Himself the prayers and worship the psalms speak about. Finally, the psalms that require holiness
and righteousness to be prayed aright are prayers that no one can offer unless covered by grace and Preface forgiveness, but
grace and forgiveness are ultimately gifts of Jesus Christ. This little book draws together several resources. The text of the
Psalms is drawn from the English Standard Version Bible. The translation of Luthers Summaries is based on the Weimar
Edition, vol. 38, and the St. Louis Edition, vol. 4. For this devotional presentation, some of Luthers references to the specific
adversaries of his day have been omitted and some of his shorter summaries have been supplemented with comments from his
other writings. The prayers that accompany each psalm first appeared in Book of Devotion: The Psalms compiled by Rev. F.
Kuegele they have been revised for this edition. For those who may desire to sing these ancient hymns, they have been pointed,
and the psalm tones from Lutheran Service Book- Altar Book have been provided for easy reference. At the conclusion of his
summaries, Luther requested: If anyone is pleased with my poor assistance by these summaries, 1 ask the he not insert them
into the Psalter between the psalms. We are overruling this request as Concordia Publishing House did a century ago (when it
printed the Altenberger Bibelwerk), confident that Luthers advice on reading the psalms can help Christians today find their way
to some of the riches of the Psalter. Luther, however, was firm about what was important: I prefer to see the text stand alone by
itself, unmixed with any thing else. Some of these summaries are really brief commentary, and it would not be proper if, placed
in the middle of the text, these sum- manes would loom larger than the psalms themselves. With this, may God bless you.
Amen. The Publisher Reading the Psalms with LuTHtR Psalms The psalms are pointed for singing. Each psalm verse is divided
into two parts, with an asterisk ( ) indicating the point of division. Most of the text of each half verse is sung to a reciting tone (a).
At the point of the vertical line (I) the final two or three syllables are sung to the notes provided. Ordinarily there is one syllable of
text for each note. When there are only two syllables, the first syllable is sung to two notes. Any psalm can be sung to any tone.
It is best, however, that the tone, which can range from cheerful and bright to somber and austere, be appropriate to the text.
Traditionally, the Gloria Patri has been used as the clos ing for the recitation and praying of the Psalms as a way to give a
Christian interprtation to these ancient hymns. It has become a familiar part of the way a Christian prays the Psalms. While the
prayers that follow each psalm included here clearly and beautifully point to Jesus Christ, we do not intend to discourage the use
of the Gloria Pain. It is printed here for your ease of reference: Glory be to the Father and 1 to the Son and to the Holy I Spirit as
it was in the the be -1 ginning, Is now, and will be forever. I Amen. Singing the Psalm.s Reading the Psalms with Luther Luthers 
/ The entire Psalter may be treated in a five fold fashion, that is, we may divide it into five groups. ctrst, some psalms prophesy.
They speak, for example, of Christ and the Church or what will happen to the saints. This class includes all the psalms that
contain promises and warnings promises for the godly and warnings for the ungodly. cjecond, there are psalms of instruction,
which teach us what we should do and what we should avoid, in accordance with the Law of God. This class includes all the
psalms that con demn human doctrines and praise the Word of God. Jhird, there are psalms of comfort, which strengthen and
comfort the saints in their trou bles and sorrows but rebuke and terrify the grants. This class includes all the psalms that St,mU '
a, e " dUranCe '  r rebuke w e sjtrsr the psalms ofpmyer - in which we call on God. praying m all kinds of distress To this class
belong all the psalms that lament or mourn or cry out against our foes. Luthers Introduction iflh. are the psalms of thanks, in
which God is praised and glorified for all His blessings and help. This class includes all the psalms that praise God for His works.
These are the psalms of the first rank, and for their sake the Psalter was created therefore it is called in Hebrew Sefer Tehillim,
that is, a praise book or book of thanksgiving. We should understand that the psalms, with all their verses, cannot always be
classified so precisely and exactly into these groups. At times one psalm might contain two, three, or even all five classifications,
so ttnhsh unoeea nFFeg  oiZFhPE  g-ocy, instruction, comfort, prayer, and thanksgiving lying next to one another. However, it is
the intention that the reader may understand that the Psalter deals with these five topics The classifi cations are a help, so that
we might more easily understand the Psalter, become adapted to it. and also be able to learn and keep it. Reading the Psalms
with Luther 2 csalr PSALM 1 'salm 1 is a psalm of comfort. It admonishes us to gladly hear and learn Gods Word and brings us
the comfort that, in so doing, we will have many and great benefits. Just as a palm tree by the water grows green and brings fruit
despite all heat and cold and the like, so also all our words and works will prosper despite all enemies. Human doc trines do not
have this benefit, atixwiot PaqlsoeeÃšeyÂ²ay, |they also pass away. For God says that those who study His Word please Him, but
the others He allows to perish. This psalm flows from the Third Commandment indeed, it is part of that commandment, for the
command to honor the Sabbath is itself the command to hear and learn of Gods Word. Psalm 1 is also included in the Second
and Third Petitions of the Lords Prayer, for in these we pray for Gods kingdom and His will, both of which are conveyed by His
Word. / 1 Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the I wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat
of I scoffers 2 but his delight is in the law I of the Lord, and on his law he meditates I day and night. 5 He is like a tree planted by
streams of water that yields its fruit in its season, and its leaf does not I wither.  In all that he does, he I prospers. 4 The wicked I
are not so, but are like chaff that the wind I drives awav. Psalm 2 5 Therefore the wicked will not stand in the  judgment, nor
sinners in the congregation of the I righteous  for the Lord knows the way of the I righteous, but the way of the wicked will I
perish. PRAYER O God, thanks and praise belong to You because You have given us Your Holy Word. Enlighten us by Your
Holy Spirit to understand Your counsel of grace in Jesus Christ, to love Your Word, and to take delight in learning Your statutes
and walking in Your Law. Bestow Your blessing and prosper ity on the works of our hands in our Christian calling and all our
conversation. Amen.  PSALM 2 2 is a prophecy of Christ, that He would suf fer, and through His suffering become King and Lord
of the whole world. Within this psalm stands a warning against the kings and lords of this world: If, instead of honoring and
serving this King, they seek to persecute and blot Him out, they shall perish. This psalm also contains the promise that those
who believe in the true King will be blessed. This psalm flows from the First Commandment, in which God promises to be our
God, who will help us in every trouble and will work all good for usjust as He has, through Christ, delivered us from sin, death,
and hell and brought us to eternal life. This blessing is what we pray for in the Second Petition of the Lords Prayerthat His king
dom come. Reading the Psalms with Luther  1 Why do the I nations rage and the peoples I plot in vain? 2 The kings of the earth
set themselves, and the rulers take counsel to-1 gether, against the Lord and against his anointed. I saying. 3 Let us burst their !
bonds apart and cast away their I cords from us." 4 He who sits in the I heavens laughs the Lord holds them in de-1 rision. 5
Then he will speak to them I in his wrath, and terrify them in his fury, I saying, 6 As for me, I have I set my King on Zion, my I
holy hill. 7 1 will tell of I the decree: The Lord said to me, You are my Son today I have be-1 gotten you. 8 Ask of me, and I will
make the nations your I heritage, and the ends of the earth your pos-1 session. 9 You shall break them with a I rod of iron and
dash them in pieces like a potters I vessel." 10 Now therefore, O I kings, be wise be warned, O rulers I of the earth. 11 Serve the
I Lord with fear, and rejoice with I trembling. 12 Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and you perish in the way, for his wrath is quickly
I kindled. Bless&d are all who take ref-1 uge in him. Psalm 3 PRAYER Thanks be unio You, O Lord Jesus Chnsi, because You
were once dead, and by Your blood redeemed us from sin and everlasting torment. We desire to serve You ail the days of our
life. Preserve us in the midst of so man) enemies, and by Your mighty hand preserve us for Your eternal kingdom! Amen. c Xsalr
PSALM 3 salm 3 is a psalm of prayer in which we follow the example of David. He prayed this prayer in distress when his son
Absalom expelled him, and his prayer was granted to him. At the end. David glorifies God for being a true helper and keeper for
all of His people w ho call on Him in distress. This psalm belongs to the First Commandment, that God will be our God and our
help. The psalm is in the Seventh Petition of the Lords Prayer, in which we pray to be delivered from all evil. 3 1 O Lord, how
many I are my foes! 1 " Many are rising a- I gainst me. 2 many are saying I of my soul, there is no salvation for I him in God. 3
But you. O Lord, are a shield a-1 bout me, my glory, and the lifter I of my head.  I cried aloud I to the Lord. and he answered me
from his I holy hill. /9 KEADINCJ THfc r 5ALMb Wl I H LU I HtK s 1 lay I down and slept 1 " 1 woke again, for the Lord sus- I
tamed me. 6 1 will not be afraid of many thousands of I people who have set themselves against me I all around. 7 Arise. O
Lord! Save me, O my God! For you strike all my enemies I on the cheek you break the teeth of the I wicked. 8 Salvation belongs
I to the Lord your blessing be on your t people! PRAYER Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God. be with us as the sure
defense of Your Church. Defend us against our ene mies, preserve us from the persecutions of the wicked, and when our last
hour has come, deliver us from all evil, both of body and soul, and receive us into Your everlasting king dom. Amen.  77 )
PSALM 4 alm 4 is a psalm of comfort, and at the same time a psalm of prayer and instruction that teaches us to trust in od when
things go wrong. It rebukes the ungodly, who concern themselves over vain gods and fleshly comfort, yet will not bear to wait
confidently for God, who is the highest comfort. God surprises us by how He deals with His saints. first. He abandons them and
tries their faith and patience. On the other hand are the ungodly who want to have a full and secure belly. If anyone talks to them
about faith and Tin despise Him and " c  this fool us what is good? Yes. you be patient until a roast chick- n flies into your mouth.
Trust in that and you will starve!" 0 Psalm 4 This psalm belongs to the First Commandment It leach es and urges us to hope in
God and endure hardship and every need with patience, and it rebukes the faithless and impatient. Psalm 4 is included in the
Third and Seventh Petitions, in which we pray that God's will be done and that we be delivered from evil. It can also be in the
Fourth Petition, when we ask for our daily bread, that is. for peace a horm haey gOPfaceEm  very earthly need. 4 1 Answer me
when 1 call. O God of my nghteousness! You have given me relief when I was I in distress. Be gracious to me and I hear my
prayer! 2 O men, how long shall my honor be turned I into shame? How long will you love vain words and seek I after lies? J But
know that the Lord has set apart the godly I for himself the Lord hears when I I call to him. 4 Be angry, and I do not sin. ponder
in your own hearts on your beds, and be I silent. 5 Offer right sacri- I fices, and put your trust I in the Lord. 6 There are many
who say, Who will show l us some good? Lift up the light of your face upon us, IO Lord! 7 You have put more joy I in my heart 
than they have when their grain and I wine abound. 8 In peace I will both lie I down and sleep for you alone, O Lord, make me
dwell in I safety. Reading the Psalms with Luther PRAYER O God, our merciful Father in heaven, fill our hearts with patience
under the cross, strengthen our faith, and so govern us that we give offense to none, neither in word nor deed. Grant us also this
day all that we need for body and soul. Amen. PSALM 5 C-salm 5 is a psalm of prayer against the false teach ers and the
rebellious spirits. It harshly condemns both their glistening teaching and their works, by whichunder the name of Godthey do
great harm to the pure Word of God and the true worship of God. The psalm prays for the righ teous, that is, for the pure Word
of God and the pure wor ship of God. In the last verse it promises that such a prayer will be heard and the rebellious spirits will
be condemned. This psalm belongs to the Second and Third Command ments, in which we are commanded to keep both Gods
name and Gods Word holy. It belongs to the First and Second Petitions of the Lords Prayer, in which we pray that God s name,
honor, and kingdom will be advanced. 1 Give ear to my words, I O Lord consider my I groaning. 2 Give attention to the sound of
my cry, my King I and my God, for to you I do I pray. J O Lord, in the morning you I hear my voice  in (he morning I prepare a
sacrifice for I youand watch. Psalm S  For you are not a God who delights in I wickedness evil may not I dwell with you. s The
boastful shall not stand be-1 fore your eyes you hate all evil-1 doers. 6 You destroy those I who speak lies the Lord abhors the
bloodthirsty and de-1 ceitful man. 7 But I, through the abundance of your steadfast love, will en-1 ter your house. I will bow down
toward your holy temple in the I fear of you. 8 Lead me, O Lord, in your righteousness because of my I enemies make your way
straight be-1 fore me. 9 For there is no truth in their mouth their inmost self is de-1 struction their throat is an open grave they
flatter I with their tongue. 10 Make them bear their guilt, O God let them fall by their own I counsels because of the abundance of
their transgressions cast them out, for they have rebelled a-1 gainst you. " But let all who take refuge in you rejoice let them ever
I sing for joy, and spread your protection over them, that those who love your name may ex-1 ult in you. 12 For you bless the
righteous, I O Lord you cover him with favor as I with a shield. PRAYER Lord Jesus Christ, You are the Light of the world and
alone the Way to eternal life. Restrain the corrupters of Your Word and all the enemies of Your truth. Preserve the truth of Your
Gospel in these latter days and in faithful teachers who will lead us in the way everlasting. Grant us to serve You in steadfast
faith and a good conscience to our end. Amen. 3 Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 6 c  alm 6 is a psalm of prayer. It
laments the great yet hidden suffering of the conscience when, on account of sins, ones faith and hope are tormented by the law
and anger of God and driven to despair or emng faith. This suf fering is called elsewhere in the Psalter the bonds of death and
the ropes of hell, or the misery of death and the anguish of hell. At the end of Psalm 6, the psalmist sees that his prayer has
been heard. He is therefore a trustworthy example for those who find themselves in such affliction, so that they may not remain
in it. The psalmist rebukes the workers of evil, that is, the false saints who generally hate and persecute such afflicted people.
Because their comfort is in their own holiness, they know nothing of these trials. They are therefore utter enemies of the true
faith. This psalm belongs to the First and Second Command ments because it commends the struggle of those who believe m
God and pray against sin and death. It is in the First Petition of the Lords Prayer, as are all other psalms of pmycr, ause its
prayer is that Gods name be called upon nnrl KUrorl '  Lord, rebuke me not in your l anger, nor discipline me  in your wrath. 2 B 
gra ci us lo me. O Lord, for I am i languishing heal me. O Lord, for my bones are  troubled. J My soul also is greatly  troubled.
But you, O Lord   how long? 4 Turn, O Lord, deliv-  er my life save me for the sake of your l steadfast love. Psalm 7 s For in
death there is no remem- I brance of you 1  in Sheol who will I give you praise? 6 I am weary with my moaning. every night I
flood my I bed with tears I drench my couch with my I weeping. 7 My eye wastes away be- I cause of grief it grows weak
because of I all my foes. 8 Depart from me, all you workers of I evil, for the Lord has heard the sound of my I weeping. 9 The
Lord has I heard my plea the Lord ac- I cepts my prayer. 10 All my enemies shall be ashamed and greatly l troubled they shall
tum back and be put to shame in a I moment. PRAYER O Lord. God of mercy, forgive us all our sins for the sake of the bitter
sufferings of Your Son, Jesus Christ. Grant us a triumphant faith by which we may obtain the victory in all afflictions and
temptations, and uphold us by Your grace when we must pass through the valley of the shadow of death. Amen. PSALM 7 c 
/salm 7 is also a psalm of prayer. It laments over slanderers who accuse the saints and their teachings as being riotous,
opposed to the authorities, and disturbing the peace. In this way Shimei the Benjaminite (2 Samuel 16:5-14) slandered the pious
David as if David had stolen King Saul s kingdom. In the same way, Christ was also accused before Reading the Psalms with
Luther Pilate, and even now slanderers defame the Gospel. David fights against this affliction with prayer and cries to God of his
innocence. By Davids own example, he shows us that such a prayer was granted, so that we might have comfort. The psalm
also threatens the slanderers and oppressors and holds before them the example of those who perish before they accomplished
the evil they intended. It belongs, like the preceding psalm, in the Second Commandment and the First Petition. 7 1 O Lord my
God, in you do I take I refuge save me from all my pursuers and de-1 liver me, 2 lest like a lion they tear my I soul apart, rending
it in pieces, with none to de-1 liver. 3 O Lord my God, if I have I done this, if there is wrong I in my hands, 4 if I have repaid my
friend with I evil or plundered my enemy with-1 out cause, 5 let the enemy pursue my soul and over-1 take it   him trample my
Ufe t0 the 8 rou nd and lay my glory I m the dust. -- w iii yuur anger Hf   P agai " S  lhe to of "y I enemies awake for me you have
appointed a I judgment. 7 Let the assembly of the peoples be gathered a-1 bout you over it re-1 turn on high. a  Lord judges the
I peoples judg e me, 0 Lord, according to my righteousness and according to the integrity that is 1 in me. 6 Psalm 7  Oh, let the
evil of the wicked come to an end. and may you establish the I righteous you who test the minds and hearts, O I righteous God!
10 My shield I is with God, who saves the up-1 right in heart. 11 God is a I righteous judge, and a God who feels indignation i
evry day.  If a man does not repent, God will I whet his sword he has bent and read-1 led his bow 13 he has prepared for him his
deadly I weapons,' making his arrows I fiery shafts. u Behold, the wicked man conceives I evil" and is pregnant with mischief and
gives I birth to lies. 15 He makes a pit, digging I it out, and falls into the hole that I he has made. 16 His mischief returns upon I
his own head, and on his own skull his violence I descends. 17 1 will give to the Lord the thanks due to his I righteousness, and
1 will sing praise to the name of the Lord, the I Most High. PRAYER Lord, our God, lover of the truth, help those who, for Your
names sake, are lied against and slandered innocently. Strengthen, comfort, and uphold those who suffer wrongful ly, and break
and hinder the craftiness of evil men who would suppress Your truth and destroy Your kingdom. Amen. Reading the Psalms with
Luther PSALM 8 r  aim 8 is a prophecy of ChristHis sufferings, resurrection, and kingly rule over all creatures. This king dom
shall be established by the voice of children, that is, it will be established by Word and faith alone, not by sword or armor. This
psalm belongs in the First Commandment, specifically that God intends to be our God, and the Second Petition, as was stated in
Psalm 2 above. d? ' O Lord, out Lord, how majestic is your name in I all the earth!  You have set your glory above the I heavens.
2 Out of the mouth of babes and infants, you have established strength because I of your foes, to still the enemy and the a-1
venger. 3 When I look at your heavens, the work of your I fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have I set in place, 4 what
is man that you are mind-1 ful of him, and the son of man that you I care for him? 5 Yet you have made him a little lower than
the heavenly  beings and crowned him with glory and l honor. 6 You have given him dominion over the works I of your hands
you have put all things under I his feet, 7 all sheep and I oxen, and also the beasts l of the field, Psalm 9 8 the birds of the
heavens, and the fish  of the sea, 1 " whatever passes along the paths I of the seas. 9 OI Lord, out Lord, how majestic is your
name in I all the earth! PRAYER Lord Jesus, You were delivered for our offenses and raised again for our justification. Bless and
defend Your Holy Church. Endue Your Word with power, strengthen our faith, and after the sufferings of this life grant us to
celebrate a happy Easter, rising again to live and reign with You in all eternity. Amen. PSALM 9 csalm 9 is also a prophecy of
the people of Christ, the Holy Christian Church. They suffer, following the example of Christ, and their blood is continually being
shed. However, the psalm gives this prophecy thankfully and comfortingly, so that it might well be called a psalm of thanks and
comfort. The Christians (and especially the holy martyrs) here thank God and are comforted by the fact that God never leaves
them. No, the more they are persecuted, the more He multiplies them, as some of the persecutors convert and become
Christians and the others perish. This psalm belongs in the First Commandment and in the Second Petition, as was stated in the
preceding psalm. 9 Reading the Psalms with Luther 9 1 l will give thanks to the Lord with my I whole heart I will recount all of
your won- I derful deeds. 2 1 will be glad and ex-1 ult in you 1 will sing praise to your name. I O Most High. 3 When my enemies
! turn back,  they stumble and perish before your I presence. 4 For you have maintained my I just cause you have sat on the
throne, giving righteous I judgment. 5 You have rebuked the nations you have made the wicked I perish you have blotted out
their name forever and I ever. 6 The enemy came to an end in everlasting ruins their cities you I rooted out the very memory of
them has I perished. 7 But the Lord sits enthroned for-1 ever he has established his throne for I justice, 8 and he judges the
world with I righteousness he judges the peoples with up-1 rightness. 9 The Lord is a stronghold for I the oppressed, a stronghol
d in times of I trouble. 10 And those who know your name put their I trust in you, for you, 0 Lord, have not forsaken those who I
seek you. w.th all our hearts we give thanks to You. O Lord, because at all umes You dwell with Your Christians and gra- nl VT
m  fai,h wh  c nfess Your  Urd ' w,th Your gntce. Increase Your Church dady. and grant us to be and to tematn, true mem- bers
of the same to our final end. Amen. Psalm 9 ' i Sing praises lo the Lord, who sils enthroned in I Zion! Tell among the peoples I
his deeds! 12 For he who avenges blood is mind- I ful of them he does not forget the cry of the af- I flicted. ,3 Be gracious to me,
I O Lord! See my affliction from those who hate me, O you who lift me up from the I gates of death, 14 that I may recount all your
I praises, that in the gates of the daughter of Zion 1 may rejoice in your sal- I vation. 15 The nations have sunk in the pit I that
they made in the net that they hid, their own foot I has been caught. 16 The Lord has made himself known he has executed I
judgment the wicked are snared in the work of I their own hands. 17 The wicked shall return I to Sheol, all the nations that for- I
get God. 18 For the needy shall not always be for- I gotten, and the hope of the poor shall not perish for- I ever. 19 Arise, O
Lord! Let not I man prevail let the nations be judged be- I fore you! 20 Put them in fear, I O Lord! Let the nations know that they I
are but men! PRAYER Teach us, O Lord, to know and to consider what a vain thing man is, that we may walk before You in true
humility, not trusting in ourselves, but seeking Your grace in Your Son. Jesus Christ, in whom You have promised to us the
forgiveness of our sins. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther  PSALM 10 c/salm 10 is a psalm of prayer. It laments over the
enemies of the kingdom of Christ who terrify Christendom with force and cunning. These enemies direct the sword of worldly
tyranny over the body and the net of false leaching over the soul. However, as it says in verse 7 (His mouth is filled with cursing
and deceit and oppression), the enemies of the kingdom of Christ can do no more than curse, that is, excommunicate and
condemn lie, that is, bnng about false doctrine and false worship and deceive, that is, delude and make a fool of the world
concerning its good, honor, power, body, and soul. But in the end, the psalm shows our com fort, that such abomination shall
perish with the end of the world. The psalm belongs in the Second Commandment and in the First Petition, as do all psalms of
prayer. 1 Why, O Lord, do you stand a-1 far off? Why do you hide yourself in times of I trouble? 2 In arrogance the wicked hotly
pur-1 sue the poor let them be caught in the schemes that they I have devised. 5 For the wicked boasts of the desires I of his
soul, and the one greedy for gain curses and renounc-1 es the Lord. 4 In the pride of his face the wicked does not I seek him all
his thoughts are, There I is no God. 5 His ways prosper at all times your judgments are on high, out I of his sight as for all his
foes, he I puffs at them. Psalm 10 6 He says in his heart. I shall I not be moved throughout all generations I shall not meet ad-1
versity 7 His mouth is filled with cursing and deceit and op-1 pression under his tongue are mischief and in-1 iquity. 8 He sits in
ambush in the villages in hiding places he murders the I innocent. His eyes stealthily watch for the I helpless 9 he lurks in
ambush like a lion in his thicket he lurks that he may I seize the poor he seizes the poor when he draws him in-1 to his net. 10
The help-1 less are crushed. sink down, and fall I by his might. n He says in his heart, God has for-1 gotten, he has hidden his
face, he will never I see it 12 Arise, O Lord, O God. lift I up your hand, forget not the af-1 dieted. 13 Why does the wicked
renounce God and say I in his heart, You will not call I to account? 14 But you do see, for you note mischief and vexation, that
you may take it in-1 to your hands to you the helpless commits himself you have been the helper of the I fatherless. 15 Break the
arm of the wicked and evil-1 doer call his wickedness to account till you I find none. The Lord is king forever and I ever the
nations perish I from his land. 17 O Lord, you hear the desire of the af-1 flicted you will strength-1 en their heart Reading the
Psalms with Luther you will incline your ear 18 to do justice to the fatherless and I the oppressed,  so that man who is of the
earth may strike ter- I ror no more. PRAYER O Lord, our faithful and jealous God, restrain the crafti ness and the power, the
oppression and the deceit of Your enemies. Save the souls of the innocent from the snares of falsehood, and lead them to the
knowledge of Your salvation in Your Son, Jesus Christ. Keep us in the true and saving faith, and grant us to walk worthy of Your
name for the sake of Your Son, our Savior. Amen. PSALM 11 11th psalm is a psalm of prayer. It laments over the heretics and
false interpreters of the Scriptures who lead the people away from the true ground of faith and bring them to their mountains,
that is, their great high holiness of works. To that end, the heretics and false interpreters of the Scriptures mock the true Teacher
and say. What shall the righteous do? But the psalm ends with the comfort that God will certainly see this. The false teachers
will be con demned and the righteous will remain. This prayer can thus be an example for us. This psalm belongs in the Second
Commandment and the First Petition, as all psalms of prayer. 9  Psalm 11 // 1 In the Lord I take refuge how can you say I to my
soul,  Flee like a bird to your I mountain, 2 for behold, the wicked I bend the bow they have fitted their arrow to the string to shoot
in the dark at the up- I right in heart 3 if the foundations I are destroyed,  what can the I righteous do? 4 The Lord is in his holy
temple the Lords throne is in I heaven his eyes see, his eyelids test, the chil- I dren of man. 5 The Lord tests the I righteous,  but
his soul hates the wicked and the one who loves I violence. 6 Let him rain coals on the I wicked  fire and sulfur and a scorching
wind shall be the portion I of their cup. 7 For the Lord is righteous he loves I righteous deeds  the upright shall be- I hold his face.
PRAYER Lord Jesus, You came into this world to reveal to us the will of Your Father and to teach us the way everlasting.
Behold how Your sacred Word is denied and corrupted in these perilous days. Have mercy upon us, save us from the snares of
unbelief and the seductive teachings of the world, and grant us to abide in Your Word that, made free from error and sin, we be
found Your disciples indeed. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 12 lie 12th psalm is a psalm of prayer. It laments
over the teachers who are always inventing new little dis coveries and filling up Gods kingdom everywhere with these new
services to God. For where human doctrine once goes in, there is no stop or end to it they increase more and more. These new
inventions load down the poor conscience beyond all limi t and work so that few true saints may remain. Against all this, the
psalm comforts us that God will awaken His salvation, that is. His Word, which confidently storms against this work of straw. He
will free the impris oned conscience. This does not happen, however, without cross and agony. As silver is purified in the fire, so
the saints also must suffer in the meantime, and by this means become ever more pure and perceive the truth so much more
clear ly. This psalm belongs in the Second and Third Commandments and the First and Second Petitions. K2  Save, O Lord, for
the godly I one is gone for the faithful have vanished from among the chil-1 dren of man. 2 Everyone utters lies to his I neighbor
with flattering lips and a double I heart they speak. 3 May the Lord cut off all I flattering lips, the tongue that I makes great
boasts, 4 those who say, With our tongue we I will prevail, our lips are with us who is master I over us? 5 Because the poor are
plundered, because the needy groan, I will now arise, I says the Lord I will place him in the safety for I which he longs " Psalm
13 6 The words of the Lord are I pure words.  like silver refined in a furnace on the ground. purified I seven times. 7 You, O Lord,
will I keep them you will guard us from this generation for- I ever. 8 On every side the I wicked prowl. as vileness is exalted
among the chil- I dren of man. PRAYER O Lord, our God, the Lord of hosts, guard us that we err not from the way of truth, and
keep us from the temptation to sit where the mockers sit. Preserve us in the faith of Your Son, and a walk of godliness all the
days of our pilgrimage. Be with us when we must walk among the wicked, sur rounded by so many evil examples, and keep us
from the evil. Amen.  PSALM 13 CJS c 13th psalm is a psalm of prayer against the sorrow or sadness of the spirit that comes at
times from the devil himself, or at times from those who act against us with spite and evil tricks. As a result, we are cast down
and grieve when we see such evil aligned against us. But prayer is stronger than all misfortune. This psalm gives us an example
by which we certainly may be comforted and learn in every kind of calamity not to become anxious or down cast, nor let these
troubles eat at our hearts. Instead, we learn to turn to prayer, crying to God about all of these things. We know that we will be
heard and finally be deliv ered. as James 5:13 also says: Is anyone among you suffer- Reading the Psalms with Luther ing? Let
him pray. This psalm belongs in the Second Commandment and the First and Last Petitions, that we may be delivered from evil.
S3 1 How long, O Lord? Will you forget me for-1 ever? How long will you hide your I face from me? 2 How long must I take
counsel in my soul and have sorrow in my heart I all the day? How long shall my enemy be exalted I over me? 3 Consider and
answer me, OI Lord my God light up my eyes, lest l sleep the I sleep of death, 4 lest my enemy say, I have prevailed I over him,
lest my foes rejoice because 1 am I shaken. 5 But 1 have trusted in your I steadfast love my heart shall rejoice in your sal-1
vation. 6 1 will sing I to the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully I with me. PRAYER Lord Jesus, who by Your incarnation was
a Man of Sorrows and acquainted with grief, graciously remember us who are yet walking in this vale of tears and who must
enter Your kingdom through many tribulations. As You have promised to be with Your own and to support them to the end, grant
us Your Holy Spirit, the Spirit of joy and of peace, to comfort our hearts and the hearts of all Your afflicted Christians with Your
everlasting comfort. Amen. Psalm 14 OT PSALM 14 r /t 14ih psalm is a psalm of prophecy and instruc tion that teaches us that
human doctrine and a life without faith is nothing hut an abomination before God If such is worship, it is only belly worship by
which the ungodly fat ten themselves, devouring the good of the people. They do not know or understand anything of the true
worship of God. though they leach and praise the Law of God Moreover, they profane and blaspheme God's Word when ever it
rebukes them at all. They will listen to nothing about trust or faith in God. These people must be resisted by prayer This prayer
shall be heard, as the last verse says, and the Gospel of Chnsl shall come. Thus this psalm reproves especially those who
tormented the people with the Law. When it speaks of the help for Zion, it is promising or prophesying of the coming of Chnsl. for
the Gospel and the Spint have come from Zion. This psalm belongs to the First and the Third Com mandments because it
praises Gods Word, promises Chnst, and also reproves the hypocntes and devounng teachers or belly-teachers. It is in the First
and Second Petitions, in which we pray for His name and His kingdom 1 The fool says in his heart. There I is no God. They are
corrupt, they do abominable deeds, there is none I who does good. 2 The Lord looks down from heaven on the chil-1 dren of
man. to see if there are any who understand, who seek I after God. Reading the Psalms with Luther s They have all turned aside
together they have be I come corrupt" there is none who does good, not I even one  Have they no knowledge, all the evil- l
doers who eat up my people as they eat bread and do not call up- I on the Lord? 5 There they are in great 1 terror/ for God is
with the generation of the I righteous.  You would shame the plans I of the poor/ but the Lord is his I refuge. 7 Oh, that salvation
for Israel would come out of I Zion! When the Lord restores the fortunes of his people, let Jacob rejoice, let Israel I be glad.
PRAYER Lord, from Your throne on high look with a pitying eye upon us poor, sinful mortals. Preserve us, that we not be led
astray by infidelity or superstition, and grant us simplicity of faith to receive the Gospel of Your Son, who has the words of
eternal life, that in Him we may be Yours in time and eter nity. Amen. PSALM 15 tie 15th psalm is a psalm of instruction that
teach es the true understanding of the Law, the truly good life, and true good works. These are all fruits of the Spirit and of faith:
to live blameless before God through true faith, to do right to the neighbor, and to turn away from the evil ways and from the
hypocrisy of the ungodly, by which they serve Psalm 15 God with fraudulent works and omit the true works. This psalm belongs
to the Third Commandment, concerning the Sabbath, in which we are to hear and learn God's Word, and it is in the Third
Petition. 1 O Lord, who shall sojourn I in your tent? Who shall dwell on your I holy hill? 2 He who walks blamelessly and does I
what is right and speaks truth I in his heart 3 who does not slander with his longue and does no evil to his I neighbor.' nor lakes
up a reproach a- I gainst his fnend. 4 in whose eyes a vile person is despised, but who honors those who I tear the Lord who
swears to his own hurt and I does not change 5 who does not put out his money at interest and does not take a bribe against the
I innocent He who does these things shall nev- I er be moved PR A Yb.R O Lord, our gracious and merciful Father, grant us
stead fastly to believe in Your Son, Jesus Christ, our Savior to fearlessly confess Him before men to the reproving of the
unbelieving and the wicked. Strengthen us by Your Spirit to walk honestly as in the light of day, both privately and in public.
Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther or PSALM 16 r 16th psalm is a prophecy of the suffering and resurrection of Christ, as
the apostles themselves powerful ly indicate (Acts 2:25 and 13:35). It clearly gives witness that Christ has discarded as idolatry
the old Law with its sacrifices and worship, and has chosen other saints and another people to be His heirs. This psalm belongs
to the First, Second, and Third Commandments, for it announces the new praise, work. Word, and worship that would come into
the world in Christ, and the passing of the old worship. It is in the First and Second Petitions. 1 Preserve me, 1 O God for in you
I take 1 refuge. 2 1 say to the Lord, You I are my Lord I have no good a-1 part from you. 3 As for the saints I in the land, they are
the excellent ones, in whom is all I my delight. 4 The sorrows of those who run after another god shall I multiply their drink
offerings of blood I will not pour out or take their names I on my lips. 5 The Lord is my chosen portion I and my cup you I hold my
lot. 6 The lines have fallen for me in pleasant I places indeed, I have a beautiful in-1 heritance. 7 1 bless the Lord who gives me I
counsel in the night also my heart in-1 structs me. Psalm 17 8 1 have set the Lord always be-1 fore me because he is at my right
hand, I shall not be I shaken. 9 Therefore my heart is glad, and my whole being re-1 joices my flesh also I dwells secure. 10 For
you will not abandon my soul I to Sheol  or let your holy one see cor-1 ruption. 11 You make known to me the I path of life in
your presence there is fullness of joy at your right hand are pleasures for-1 evermore. PRAYER Thanks be unto You, Lord
Jesus, for Your bitter suffer ings, Your shameful death, and Your joyous resurrection. Enlighten our eyes to see in You the way
unto life. Uphold us by Your truth, so we may not fall into idolatry and false worship, and preserve us in the true faith unto eternal
life. Amen. PSALM 17 C-/he 17th psalm is a psalm of prayer. It laments over the false teachers and the scrupulous saints who,
by human doctrines and works, lead people away from God's Word. They persecute the true doctrine and hate the cross of
Christ. With their doctrines and works, they seek only that they might have good things, praise, and freedom here on earth, and
that they might not have to suffer want. It beloogs to the Second and Third Commandments and in the First Petition, that Gods
Word and name may be sanctified. Reading the Psalms with Luther /7 1 Hear a just cause, O Lord attend I to my cry!" Give ear
to my prayer from lips free i of deceit! 2 From your presence let my vindi- ! cation come! Let your eyes be- I hold the right! J You
have tried my heart, you have visited me by night, you have tested me, and you will find I nothing I have purposed that my
mouth will I not transgress. 4 With regard to the works of man, by the word I of your lips I have avoided the ways of the I violent.
5 My steps have held fast I to your paths 1 my feet I have not slipped. 6 I call upon you, for you will answer me, I O God incline
your ear to me I hear my words. 7 Wondrously show your I steadfast love,  O Savior of those who seek refuge from their
adversaries at I your right hand. 8 Keep me as the apple I of your eye hide me in the shadow I of your wings, 9 from the wicked
who do me I violence, my deadly enemies who sur- I round me. 10 They close their hearts to I pity with their mouths they speak
ar- I rogantly. n They have now surrounded I our steps they set their eyes to cast us I to the ground. 12 He is like a lion ea- I ger
to tear, as a young lion lurking in I ambush. 11 Arise, IO Lord! Confront him, sub- I due him! Psalm 18 Deliver my soul from the
wicked by your sword. from men by your hand, l O Lord, from men of the world whose portion is i in this life. You fill their womb
with I treasure" they are satisfied with children, and they leave their abundance to their i infants. 15 As for me. 1 shall behold
your face in I righteousness : when I awake, 1 shall be satisfied with your i likeness. PRAYER Lord Jesus, true Shepherd and
Defender of Your people, grant us wisdom, strength, and patiencewisdom to know and to walk in the way everlasting strength to
resist all temptations of error and sin, and to boldly confess Your truth before men patience to bear the cross without murmuring,
and gladly to suffer with You that we ma also rule with You Amen.  PSALM IS r X ne 18th psalm is a psalm of thanks in which,
as the title declares. David thanks God that He has delivered him from all his enemies, such as Saul, the heathen. Absalom, and
the rebellious Israelites. David relates that he was in deadly distresses and that God had helped him out of them. In the manner
of a prophet he shows how God helped him as God had helped Israel in Egypt. He praises God. who held back his enemies,
and thanks God for His help against the disobedient and the rebels, such as were Seba and most of Israel (2 Samuel 20). David
had so many ene mies and hostile subjects, that even the heathen foreigners Reading the Psalms with Luther (he says here)
were more obedient that his own people. Consequently, everyone needs to keep this psalm as an example of how we should
thank God for His help when He delivers us out of our troubles. Whoever wants to explain this psalm spiritually may think of
David as a Christian, standing against the heathens, the tyrants, the heretics, and the false Christians. From all of these, Christ
and all His people will finally be delivered. Psalm 18 belongs in the Second Commandment and in the First Petition, because it
thanks God and praises His holy name. A9 1 1 I love you,  O I Lord, my strength. 2 The Lord is my rock and my fortress and my
de- I liverer,  my God, my rock, in whom I take refuge, my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my I stronghold. 3 1 call upon the
Lord, who is worthy I to be praised,  and I am saved from my I enemies. 4 The cords of death en- I compassed me  the torrents
of destruction as- I sailed me 5 the cords of Sheol en- I tangled me the snares of death con- I fronted me. 6 In my distress I
called upon the Lord to my God I I cried for help.  From his temple he heard my voice, and my cry to him I reached his ears. 7
Then the earth I reeled and rocked the foundations also of the mountains trembled and quaked, because he was I angry. 8
Smoke went up from his nostrils, and devouring fire I from his mouth  glowing coals flamed I forth from him. 46 Psalm 18 9 He
bowed the heavens and I came down thick darkness was un- I der his feet. 10 He rode on a cher- I ub and flew he came swiftly
on the wings I of the wind. 1 1 He made darkness his covering, his canopy a- I round him,  thick clouds dark with I water. 12 Out
of the bnghtness be- I fore him hailstones and coals of fire broke I through his clouds. 13 The Lord also thundered in the 1
heavens. and the Most High uttered his voice, hailstones and I coals of fire. 14 And he sent out his arrows and I scattered them
he flashed forth lightnings and I routed them. 15 Then the channels of the sea were seen. and the foundations of the world were
1 laid bare  at your rebuke. O Lord, at the blast of the breath of your I nostrils. 16 He sent from on high, he I took me he drew me
out of many I waters. 17 He rescued me from my strong I enemy  and from those who hated me. for they were loo might- I y for
me. 10 They confronted me in the day of my ca- I lamity, but the Lord was I my support. 19 He brought me out into a I broad
place he rescued me. because he delight- I ed in me. 20 The Lord dealt with me according to my I righteousness according to
the cleanness of my hands he re- I warded me. Reading the Psalms with Luther 21 For I have kept the ways I of the Lord, and
have not wickedly departed I from my God. 22 For all his just decrees were be-1 fore me, and his statutes I did not put a-1 way
from me. 23 1 was blameless be-1 fore him, and I kept myself I from my guilt. 24 So the Lord has rewarded me according to my
I righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands I in his sight. PRAYER Praise, honor, and thanksgiving do we offer
unto You, O Father of lights, from whom comes every good and every perfect gift, because You daily preserve us from many
evils, guard us in many dangers, crown us with many blessings, enable our hearts to appreciate Your goodness, and to rejoice
before You, through Jesus Christ, our Savior. Amen. 25 With the merciful you show yourself I merciful with the blameless man
you show yourself I blameless 26 with the purified you show your-1 self pure and with the crooked you make yourself seem I
tortuous. 27 For you save a humble I people, but the haughty eyes I you bring down. 2i For it is you who I light my lamp the Lord
my God lightens my I darkness. 29 For by you I can run a-1 gainst a troop, and by my God I can leap o I ver a wall. 30 This
Godhis way is I perfect the word of the Lord proves true he is a shield for all those who take ref- 1 uge in him. Psalm 18 For who
is God, I but the Lord?" And who is a rock, ex- I cepi our God? 32 the God who equipped I me with strength" and made my way I
blameless. 33 He made my feet like the feet I of a deer' and set me secure I on the heights. 34 He trains my I hands for war,' so
that my arms can bend a I bow of bronze. 35 You have given me the shield of your sal- ! vation,  and your right hand supported
me. and your gentleness I made me great. 36 You gave a wide place for my steps I under me, !i and my feet I did not slip. 37 1
pursued my enemies and over-1 took them, and did not turn back till they I were consumed. 38 1 thrust them through, so that
they were not a-1 ble to rise they fell un-1 der my feet. 39 For you equipped me with strength for the I battle, you made those
who rise against me sink I under me. 40 You made my enemies turn their I backs to me, 1 ' and those who hated me 11
destroyed. 41 They cned for help, but there was I none to save they cried to the Lord, but he did not I answer them. 42 1 beat
them fine as dust be-1 fore the wind 1 cast them out like the mire I of the streets. 43 You delivered me from strife with the I
people" you made me the head of the nations people whom 1 had not known I served me. 44 As soon as they heard of me they
o-1 beyed me foreigners came cring-1 ing to me. 4f9 Reading the Psalms with Luther 45 Foreigners I lost heart and came
trembling out of their I fortresses. 46 The Lord lives, and blessed I be my rock. and exalted be the God of my sal-1 vation 47 the
God who gave me I vengeance and subdued peoples I under me, 48 who delivered me from my enemies yes, you exalted me
above those who rose a-1 gainst me you rescued me from the man of I violence. 49 For this 1 will praise you, O Lord, among
the I nations, and sing I to your name. 50 Great salvation he bnngs I to his king, and shows steadfast love to his anointed, to
David and his offspring for-1 ever. PRAYER Lord Jesus, both Davids Son and David's Lord, thanks be to You, because You
undertook the battle against our ene mies, and ransomed us from the power of them that hated us. As You now sit at the right
hand of the Father, a Lord over all things, be our Rock and our Defense, our Buckler and the Captain of our salvation, that in
Your name we may defy and despise the very gates of hell, triumphing over them forever and ever. Amen. Psalm IW r  /ne 19th
psalm is a prophecy It speaks of how the Gospel would spread to the entire world, as tar as the heav ens extend. Day and night
it would he spread, not on! in Hebrew but in all languages. Just as the sun shines and gives warmth everywhere, so also will the
new law of the Gospel enlighten and leach all kinds ot people, condoning and purifying them. In this way the old Law is
removed, which was not so pure, bright, lovely, or imperishable This psalm belongs in the Third Commandment, lor it proclaims
the true Sabbath in which God's Word is taught and believed. /9  The heavens declare the glo- I ry ot God/ and the sky above
proclaims his I handiwork 2 Day to day I pours out speech. and night to night reveals I knowledge. J There is no speech, nor I
are there words/ whose voice I is not heard  Their measuring line goes out through all the earth, and their words to the end I of
the world/ In them he has set a tent I for the sun. 5 which comes out like a bridegroom leaving his I chamber/ and. like a strong
man. runs its I course with joy. 6 Its rising is from the end of the heavens, and its circuit to the I end of them/ and there is nothing
hidden I from its heat 7 The law of the Lord is perfect, reviv- I ing the soul/ the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the I
simple Reading the Psalms with Luther 8 the precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing I the heart the commandment of the Lord is
pure, enlightening I the eyes 9 the fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for-1 ever 1 " the just decrees of the Lord are true, and
righteous alto-1 gether. 10 More to be desired are they than gold, even I much fine gold sweeter also than honey and drippings
of the I honeycomb. 11 Moreover, by them is your I servant warned  in keeping them there is I great reward. 12 Who can dis- I
cem his eirors? Declare me innocent from I hidden faults. 13 Keep back your servant also from presumptuous sins let them not
have dominion I over me!  Then I shall be blameless, and innocent of great trans-1 gression. u Let the words of my mouth and
the meditation of my heart be acceptable 1 in your sight, O Lord, my rock and my re-1 deemer. PRAYER Lord Jesus, You are
the Sun of righteousness with heal ing in His wings. Enlighten our darkened understanding by Your Holy Word. Enkindle our
hearts and mold our will to walk in faith, love, and hope unto all pleasing. Let the light of Your Gospel shine on the nations that
sit in darkness, and preserve Your Church to the day of Your coming. Amen. Psalm 20 r PSALM 20 ie 20th psalm is a psalm of
prayer. It prays specifically for emperors, kings, princes, governors, and all those who sit in any seat of authority. The psalm
prays that God would grant them grace to rule peacefully and well, giving them good fortune and victory over their enemies For
wherever good earthly order is established by the rea son and power of governors and princes, people do not earnestly and
heartily pray for them So that people might pray for them, the psalm declares that only the greatest fool, totally blind, would
presume to rule land and people out of his own head. This psalm belongs in the Second Commandment, as do all the psalms of
prayer, in which one calls on Gods name Psalm 20 is in the Third Petition, that Gods will and not the devils might be done. 0 1
May the Lord answer you in the day of I trouble! k May the name of the God of Jacob pro-1 tect you! 2 May he send you help
from the sanctu-1 ary and give you support from I Zion' 3 May he remember all your I offerings and regard with favor your burnt
sacri-1 fices! 4 May he grant you your I hearts desire and fulfill I all your plans! 5 May we shout for joy over your salvation, and in
the name of our God set up our I banners! May the Lord fulfill all your pe-1 titions! 6 Now I know that the Lord saves his a-1
nointed he will answer him from his holy heaven with the saving might of his I right hand. Reading the Psalms with Luther 1
Some trust in chariots and some in I horses, but we trust in the name of the I Lord our God. 8 They col-1 lapse and fall, but we
rise and I stand uptight. 9 O Lord, I save the king! May he answer us I when we call. PRAYER Thanks be unto You, O God, King
of kings, because You have granted a good and a free government to our land. What You have given graciously preserve to us
and our children. And grant that the civil liberty that we enjoy may remind us to seek that spiritual and everlasting freedom which
is found alone in the kingdom of Your Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior. Amen. C-ne 21st psalm is a prophecy of the
kingdom of Christ, the kingdom that is and remains eternally and spiri tually before God. At the same time, it also announces
that those who reject this kingdom shall be destroyed. This psalm belongs in the First Commandment and the Second Petition,
for it announces a new worship and kingdom. x?/ 1 0 Lord, in your strength the king re-1 joices, and in your salvation how
greatly I he exults! 2 You have given him his I hearts desire and have not withheld the request I of his lips. Psalm 21 3 For you
meet him with rich I blessings you set a crown of fine gold up- I on his head. 4 He asked life of you you gave I it to him, length of
days forever and I ever. 3 His glory is great through your sal-1 vation splendor and majesty you be- I stow on him. 6 For you
make him most blessed for- I ever you make him glad with the joy of your I presence. I For the king trusts I in the Lord, and
through the steadfast love of the Most High he shall I not be moved. 8 Your hand will find out all your I enemies your nght hand
will find out those who I hate you. 9 You will make them as a blazing oven when I you appear  The Lord will swallow them up in
his wrath, and fire will con- I sume them. 10 You will destroy their descendants I from the earth, and their offspring from among
the chil- I dren of man. II Though they plan evil a-1 gainst you, though they devise mischief, they will I not succeed. X2 For you
will put I them to flight you will aim at their faces I with your bows. 13 Be exalted, O Lord, I in your strength! We will sing and I
praise your power. PRAYER Lord Jesus, our High Priest and our victorious King, wash us by Your blood, and plead for us with
the Father, showing Him Your opened side and Your pierced hands. Preserve us in Your kingdom to serve You in true faith and
piety. Restrain the enemies of Your Church, both visible and invisible, and keep us unto eternal life. Amen. Reading the Psalms
with Luther PSALM 22 22nd psalm is a prophecy of the suffering and resurrection of Christ and a prophecy of the Gospel, which
the entire world shall hear and receive. Beyond all other texts, it clearly shows Christs torment on the cross, that He was pierced
hand and foot and His limbs stretched out so that His bones could have been counted. Nowhere in the other prophets can one
find so clear a description. It is indeed one of the chief psalms. It belongs in the First Commandment, for it promises a new
worship of God. It is in the First and Second Petitions. x2? 1 My God, my God, why have you for-1 saken me? Why are you so
far from saving me, from the words of my I groaning? 2 O my God, 1 cry by day, but you do not I answer, and by night, but 11
find no rest. 3 Yet you are I holy, enthroned on the praises of I Israel. 4 In you our fathers I trusted they trusted, and you de-1
livened them. 5 To you they cried and were I rescued in you they trusted and were not I put to shame. 6 But I am a worm and I
not a man, scorned by mankind and despised by the I people. 7 All who see me I mock me they make mouths at ihe they I wag
their heads c S6 Psalm 22 8 He trusts in the Lord let him de-1 liver him let him rescue him, for he de-1 lights in him! 9 Yet you
are he who took me I from the womb you made me trust you at my I mother's breasts. 10 On you was I cast I from my birth, 1
and from my mothers womb you have I been my God. n Be not far from me, for trouble I is near/ and there is I none to help. 12
Many bulls en- I compass me strong bulls of Bashan sur- I round me 11 they open wide their I mouths at me, like a ravening and
roanng I lion. 14 1 am poured out like water, and all my bones are I out of joint my heart is like wax it is melted with- I in my
breast ,s my strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue sticks ! to my jaws you lay me in the I dust of death. 16 For
dogs en- I compass me a company of evildoers encircles me they have pierced my I hands and feet 17 1 can count I all my
bones they stare and gloat I over me 18 they divide my garments a-1 mong them, and for my clothing they I cast lots. 19 But
you. O Lord, do not be I far off! O you my help, come quickly I to my aid! 20 Deliver my soul I from the sword, my precious life
from the power I of the dog! S7 Reading the Psalms with Luther 21 Save me from the mouth of the I lion! You have rescued me
from the horns of the wild I oxen! PRAYER Lord Jesus, Lamb of the Father's own choosing, who offered Yourself a bloody
sacnfice for our sins on the Place of Skulls, receive our thanks for Your love beyond measure. Let Your wounds be the solace of
our hearts, and Your mer its the ornaments of our souls in life and death, that, with Your perfected saints on high, we may
forever sing Your praise. Amen. 22 1 will tell of your name to my I brothers in the midst of the congregation I will I praise you: 23
You who fear the Lord, praise him! All you offspring of Jacob, glo-1 rify him, and stand in awe of him, all you offspring of I Israel!
24 For he has not despised or abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, and he has not hidden his I face from him, but has heard,
when he I cried to him. 25 From you comes my praise in the great congre-1 gation my vows I will perform before those who I
fear him. 26 The afflicted shall eat and be satisfied, those who seek him shall I praise the Lord! May your hearts live for- I ever!
27 All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn I to the Lord, and all the families of the nations shall worship be-1 fore you.
28 For kingship belongs I to the Lord, and he rules over the I nations. Psalm 23  All the prosperous of the earth eat and I worship
before him shall bow all who go down to the dust, even the one who could not keep him- I self alive. Posterity shall I serve him it
shall be told of the Lord to the coming gener-1 at ion 31 they shall come and proclaim his righteousness to a people I yet
unborn. that he has I done it. PRAYER Merciful and kind are You. O Lord of hosts, because You have sent the Gospel of Your
Son to us Gentiles. Our fathers went to worship idols as they were led, but to us, their chil dren, You have sent the light, though
we deserved it not. Cause it to dwell richly with our children and us, and by Your Spint make it to grow in our hearts and bring
fruit unto eternal life. Amen PSALM 23 r 23rd psalm is a psalm of thanks in which a Christian heart praises and thanks God for
teaching him and keeping him on the right way, comforting and protecting him in every danger through His Holy Word. The
psalmist compares himself to a sheep that a faithful shepherd leads into fresh grass and cool water. In addition, he shows the
table, the cup. and oil also as images from the Old Testament worship and calls it all Gods Word, as it is also called rod and
staff, grass, water, and the way of righteous ness. This psalm belongs in the Third Commandment and in the Second Petition.
59 Reading the Psalms with Luther 3 1 The Lord is my I shepherd i I shall not want. 2 He makes me lie down in green I
pastures. He leads me beside still I waters. 3 He re-1 stores my soul. He leads me in paths of righteousness for his I names
sake.  Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for you are I with me your rod and your
staff, they I comfort me. 5 You prepare a table before me in the presence of my I enemies you anoint my head with oil my cup I
overflows. 6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days I of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord for-1
ever. PRAYER Lord Jesus, who alone is that one Good Shepherd, thanks be unto You for all Your spiritual and bodily benefits.
Let the Word of Your salvation dwell among us richly, and suffer not that trusty staff, the word of Your promise, to be taken from
us. And when the shadow of death spreads over us, conduct us safely to the fold of the perfected saints, the tabernacle not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens. Amen. 60 Psalm 24 sp V PSALM 24 24th psalm is a prophecy of the coming world
wide kingdom of Christ. It calls on the "doors" of the world, that is, the kings and princes, to make way for the kingdom of Christ.
They and those who for the most pan rage against Him (Psalm 2) ask, "Who is this King of glory? as if they were to say, This
beggar' Yes. this heretic! This criminal! Shall he be a king and shall we yield and submit to him? We shall not!" In this way the
psalm shows that Gods Word will certainly be condemned and persecuted This psalm belongs in the First Commandment and in
both the Third Commandment and the Third Petition  The earth is the Lords and the full- I ness thereof, the world and those who
I dwell therein. 2 for he has founded it up-1 on the seas" and established it upon the I rivers. 3 Who shall ascend the hill I of the
Lord' And who shall stand in his I holy place? 4 He who has clean hands and a I pure heart, 51 who does not lift up his soul to
what is false and does not swear de- I ceitfully. 5 He will receive blessing I from the Lord and nghteousness from the God of his
sal- I vation. 6 Such is the generation of those who I seek him." who seek the face of the God of I Jacob. 7 Lift up your heads, O
gates! And be lifted up, O I ancient doors, that the King of glory I may come in. 6 / Reading the Psalms with Luther 8 Who is this
King of I glory? The Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord, mighty in I battle! 9 Lift up your heads, O gates! And lift them up, O I
ancient doors, that the King of glory I may come in. Who is this King of I glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of I glory!
PRAYER Ah, dearest Jesus, holy Child, Prepare a bed, soft, undefiled, A quiet chamber set apart For You to dwell within my
heart. Amen, (/.sfl .vss m PSALM 25 me 25th psalm is a psalm of prayer in which the righteous pray that God will make them
godly, forgive their sins, guard them from sin and shame, and finally deliver them from all enemies and all evil. Along with this
the psalm mocks the false, self-centered spirits and teachers. It belongs to the Second Commandment and the Second Petition.
1 To you. I O Lord, 1 lift I up my soul. 2 O my God. in you I trust let me not be I put to shame. let not my enemies exult I over me.
6  Psalm 25 i Indeed, none who wait tor you shall he I put to shame: 1 the shall he ashamed who are wantonly I treacherous. 4
Make me to know your ways. I O Lord:" leach me I your paths 5 Lead me in your truth and leach me. lor you are the God ol ms
sal- I vation: tor you t wail all the I da long. 6 Remember your meres. O Lord. and your I steadfast love, tor the have been I from
of old.  Remember not the sins of ms youth or my trans-1 gressions: according to your steadfast love remember me, for the sake
of your goodness. I O Lord! 8 Good and upright I is the Lord: therefore he instructs sinners I in the way. 9 He leads the humble
in I what is right. and teaches the humble I his was. 10 All the paths of the Lord are steadfast love and I faithfulness, for those
who keep his covenant and his testi- I monies. n For your name's sake, I O Lord. pardon ms guilt, for I it is great. o Who is the
man who I fears the Lord  Him will he instruct in the way that I he should choose. 15 His soul shall abide in well-1 being. and his
offspring shall inher- I it the land 14 The friendship of the Lord is for those who I fear him. and he makes known to them his I
covenant. 6  Reading the Psalms with Luther 15 My eyes are ever I toward the Lord, for he will pluck my feet out I of the net. 16
Turn to me and be gra-1 cious to me, for 1 am lonely and af-1 flicted. 17 The troubles of my heart I are enlarged bring me out of
my dis-1 tresses. 18 Consider my affliction and my I trouble, and forgive I all my sins. 19 Consider how many I are my foes, and
with what violent hatred they I hate me. 20 Oh, guard my soul, and de-1 liver me! Let me not be put to shame, for I take ref-1
uge in you. 21 May integrity and uprightness pre-1 serve me, for 11 wait for you. 22 Redeem Israel, I O God, out of all his I
troubles. PRAYER O Lord, our most merciful Father in heaven, be gracious to us and forgive us our sins. Rule in our hearts by
Your Spirit, that we may hate and forsake all manner of evil. Restrain our enemies who would deprive us of our salvation, and be
to us, and Your whole Church on earth, a very pres ent help in time of need. Amen. 64 Psalm 26 PSALM 26 r 26th psalm is a
psalm of prayer that laments the false saints who want to be godly through the works of the Law and who condemn the saints
who are godly only through Gods goodness and grace. This psalm accuses the false saints of willingly accepting bribes. For
such saints are certainly pure servants of greed, whose God is their stom ach, as St. Paul says (Philippians 3:19). But with all
their spiritual hypocrisy and their worldly glory, they are destruc tive saints. Therefore, it is good to pray that they may not
deceive us. This psalm belongs in the Third Commandment and in the First and Second Petitions, for it speaks of the worship of
God and of His kingdom. 26 1 Vindicate me, O Lord, for I have walked in my in-1 tegrity, and 1 have trusted in the Lord without I
wavering. 2 Prove me, O Lord, and I try me test my heart I and my mind. 3 For your steadfast love is be-1 fore my eyes. 14 and
1 walk in your  faithfulness. 4 1 do not sit with men of I falsehood, nor do I consort with I hypocrites. 5 1 hate the assembly of
evil-1 doers, and 1 will not sit with the I wicked.  I wash my hands in I innocence and go around your altar. I O Lord, 7 proclaimin
g thanksgiving I aloud, and telling all your I wondrous deeds. 63 Reading the Psalms with Luther  O Lord, I love the habitation I
of your house and the place where your I glory dwells. 9 Do not sweep my soul away with I sinners, nor my life with blood- I
thirsty men, 10 in whose hands are evil de-1 vices, and whose right hands are I full of bribes. 11 But as for me, 1 shall walk in
my in-1 tegrity redeem me, and be gra-1 cious to me. ,2 My foot stands on I level ground in the great assembly I will I bless the
Lord. PRAYER Lord Jesus, abide with us in these latter evil days. Grant to Your Church true shepherds and faithful pastors who
preach Your Word in its purity, and who lead us in the way of truth. Preserve our souls from being deluded by worldly wisdom
and the teaching of men who walk after their own thoughts, and keep up steadfast in Your Word to our end. Amen. PSALM 27 le
27th psalm is a psalm of thanks. However, it also prays much and gives us comfort against the false teachers who give a false
witness, blaspheming without any hesitation. For only entirely foolhardy saints would give a witness, bold and impudent, before
Godfrom whom they have no command! Yet we see it daily: the more foolish and unlearned the people are, the more bold and
audacious they are to preach and to teach the whole world. No one knows anything they alone know all. They prepare
themselves to 66 Psalm 27 make war and revolt against the true saints and God-fearers. This psalm belongs in the Second and
First Commandments and in the First and Second Petitions. ' The Lord is my light and my salvation: whom l shall I fear?" The
Lord is the stronghold of my life: of whom shall 1 I be afraid' 1 2 When evildoers assail me to eat I up my flesh/ my adversaries
and foes, it is they who stum- 1 ble and fall. 3 Though an army encamp against me. my heart I shall not fear/ though war anse
against me, yet I will be I confident 4 One thing have I asked of the Lord. that will I seek l after: that 1 may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life, to gaze upon the beauty of the Lord and to inquire in his I temple s For he will hide me in his
shelter in the day of I trouble/ he will conceal me under the cover of his tent: he will lift me high up- I on a rock. 6 And now my
head shall be lifted up above my enemies all around me, and I will offer in his tent sacrifices with I shouts of joy/ 1 will sing and
make melody I to the Lord. 7 Hear. O Lord, when 1 I cry aloud/ be gracious to me and I answer me! 8 You have said, I Seek my
face. My heart says to you. Your face. Lord, I do 1 seek. 9 Hide not your face from me. Turn not your servant away in I anger/ 67
Reading the Psalms with Luther O you who have been my help. Cast me not off forsake me not, O God of my sal-1 vation! 10
For my father and my mother have for-1 saken me, but the Lord will I take me in. 11 Teach me your way, I O Lord/ and lead me
on a level path because of my I enemies. 12 Give me not up to the will of my adver-1 saries for false witnesses have risen
against me, and they breathe out I violence. 15 1 believe that 1 shall look upon the goodness I of the Lord in the land of the I
living! 14 Wait I for the Lord be strong, and let your heart take courage wait I for the Lord! PRA YER Lord, our God, You are
merciful and kind, true and faith ful. Preserve us in Your Word, and guard Your Church against all oppressors and faithless
leaders. Grant peace to our coun try, and wisdom to our government to protect right and truth, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen. 4  PSALM 28 28th psalm is a psalm of prayer
that David prayed against Saul and similar enemies. He prayed espe cially against this evil: that they spoke well to him and
acted friendly at times, yet attempted to kill himas after ward Absalom also attempted. Joab acted the same against 6  Psalm 28
Amasa and Abner, so thai David was concerned lesi God hold him accountable lor this, and therefore he prayed that he might
not be earned oft with the godless. We can pra this psalm against the tyrants and against the rebellious spirits. For the tyrants
portray themselves as friendly, yet in daily machinations they seek ways to kill and destroy The rebellious spirits praise God's
glory, Word, and worship in highest measure they want to help all the world and are extraordinarily humble. Yet for all of that,
they seek the cor ruption of souls and are. under sheeps clothing, ravening wolves. This psalm belongs in the Third and Second
Commandments and the First and Second Petitions. 1 To you.O Lord. 1 call my rock be not I deaf to me. lest, if you be silent to
me, 1 become like those who go down I to the pit. 2 Hear the voice of my pleas for mercy, when I cry to i you for help, " when I
lift up mv hands toward your most holy sanctu- I ary. J Do not drag me off with the wicked, with the workers of I evil.  who speak
peace with their neighbors while evil is I in their hearts. 4 Give to them according to their work and according to the evil I of their
deeds/ give to them according to the work of their hands render them their I due reward. 5 Because they do not regard the works
of the Lord or the work I of his hands.  he will tear them down and build them I up no more. 6 Blessed I be the Lord!" for he has
heard the voice of my pleas for I mercy. 69 Reading the Psalms vmth Luther 7 The Lord is iny strength and my shield in him my
heart trusts, and l I am helped my heart exults, and with my song I give I thanks to him. 8 The Lord is the strength of his 1 people
1 he is the saving refuge of his a-1 nointed. 9 Oh, save your people and bless your I heritage! Be their shepherd and carry them
for-  ever. PRAYER God of all grace, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who knows the enemies of Your Church and are able
to thwart all their designs protect us against all tyrants, heretics, and hypocrites. Hear our prayer and grant us to love Your
Word, to promote Your honor upon earth, and to con tinue in Your service always even to the end. Amen. PSALM 29 he 29th
psalm is a prophecy of the Gospel, that it shall resound with power throughout the world and over throw the wisdom and renown
of all kings, princes, lords, and peoples, and Christ alone shall be the only King. He shall be served and glorified with true
wisdom and holiness. Therefore, He established the flood. Baptism, in which the old Adam is drowned and the new man arises.
He gives the name of deserts, forests, and deer to the lands of the earth that were under Jew or Gentile and that have been
opened and converted to the Gospel. This psalm belongs in the Third Commandment and in the Second Petition. Psalm 29 9 1
Ascribe to the Lord, O heavenly I beings," ascnbe to the Lord glo-1 ry and strength. 2 Ascribe to the Lord the glory I due his
name worship the Lord in the splendor of I holiness.  The voice of the Lord is over the I waters the God of glory thunders, the
Lord. over many I waters. 4 The voice of the Lord is I powerful the voice of the Lord is full of I majesty. 5 The voice of the Lord
breaks the I cedars the Lord breaks the cedars of I Lebanon. t He makes Lebanon to skip I like a calf, and Sinon like a young I
wild ox. 7 The voice 1 of the Lord flashes forth I flames of fire. 8 The voice of the Lord shakes the I wilderness the Lord shakes
the wilderness I of Kadesh. 9 The voice of the Lord makes the deer give birth and strips the I forests bare, and in his temple all
cry, I Glory!" o The Lord sits enthroned o- I ver the flood the Lord sits enthroned as king for-1 ever. o May the Lord give strength
to his I people! May the Lord bless his people I with peace! PRAYER Thanks and praise be unto You. our God and Lord, for
sending us the Gospel of Your Son. Jesus Christ, in which You leach us the way of salvation and comfort us with the hope of
everlasting life. Make Your Word in us a power of salvation, and the anchor of our souls in life and death. Cause also the voice
of Your Word to be sounded abroad, that the nations that do not know You may come to Your light. Amen. 7 / Reading the
Psalms with Luther PSALM 30 30th psalm is a psalm of thanks in which the psalmist gives thanks that God has redeemed him
from the high spiritual afflictions of the devil, which are sadness, depression, terror, despair, doubt, the perils of death, and
similar poisonous, fiery darts of the devil. Nevertheless, the psalmist knows he has the comfort that God is only angry for the
blink of an eye and neither desires nor wills our death or distress but desires rather to see us live and be joy ful. This psalm
belongs in the Second Commandment and in the First Petition. SO 1 1 will extol you, O Lord, for you have I drawn me up and
have not let my foes rejoice I over me. 2 O Lord my God, 1 cried to I you for help, and you have I healed me. 3 O Lord, you have
brought up my soul I from Sheol you restored me to life from among those who go down I to the pit. 4 Sing praises to the Lord, O
I you his saints, and give thanks to his I holy name. 5 For his anger is but for a moment, and his favor is for a I lifetime. Weeping
may tarry for the night, but joy comes with the I morning. 6 As for me, 1 said in my pros- I perity,  1 shall nev-  er be moved. 7 By
your favor, O Lord, you made my mountain I stand strong you hid your face 11 was dismayed. Psalm 30  To you, O i Lord, I cry,
and to the Lord 1 plead for I mercy:  What profit is there in my death, if I go down i to the pit? Will the dust praise you? Will it tell
of your I faithfulness ? 10 Hear, O Lord, and be merci- I ful to me!' O Lord, be my l helper!' n You have turned for me my
mourning into I dancing" you have loosed my sackcloth and clothed me with I gladness. '2 that my glory may sing your praise
and not be I silent.' O Lord my God. 1 will give thanks to you for- I ever! PRAYER Thanks to You, our Father in heaven, for the
countless blessings You have bestowed on us from our childhood days. Thanks to You because You so often have been our
Helper in spiritual and bodily need. As in the past, be with us in the future to give us a joyous heart, to uphold us in trials, to
strengthen us in temptations, and to comfort us by Your Holy Spirit through Jesus Christ, our Savior. Amen. Reading the Psalms
with Luther or PS AIM 31 Che 31st psalm is a universal psalm of thanks, a psalm of prayer, and a psalm of comfort, all at the
same time. It is spoken in the person of Christ and of His saints, who, on account of the Word of God, are plagued their entire
livesinwardly with fears and troubles outwardly with persecutions, slander, and contempt. Yet they are com forted and delivered
by God out of all of them. This psalm belongs in the Second and Third Commandments and in the First and Second Petitions. 3
/ ' In you, O Lord, do I take refuge let me never be I put to shame in your righteousness de-1 liver me! 2 Incline your ear to me
rescue me I speedily! Be a rock of refuge for me, a strong fortress to I save me! 1 For you are my rock and my I fortress and for
your name's sake you lead me and I guide me 4 you take me out of the net they have hidden I for me, for you are my I refuge. s
Into your hand I commit my I spirit you have redeemed me, O Lord, I faithful God. 6 1 hate those who pay regard to worthless I
idols, but I trust 1 in the Lord. 7 1 will rejoice and be glad in your I steadfast love, because you have seen my affliction you have
known the distress I of my soul, 9 and you have not delivered me into the hand of the I enemy you have set my feet in a I broad
place. Psalm 31 9 Be gracious to me, 0 Lord, for 1 am I in distress my eye is wasted from grief my soul and my body I also. 10
For my life is spent with sorrow, and my years with I sighing my strength fails because of my iniquity, and my bones I waste
away. n Because of all my adversaries I have become a reproach, especially to my neighbors, and an object of dread to my ac-1
quaintances those who see me in the street I flee from me. 12 1 have been forgotten like one I who is dead I have become like a
broken I vessel. 13 For 1 hear the whispering of many terror on 1 every side! as they scheme together against me, as they plot
to I take my life. PRAYER Lord Jesus, we thank You for taking from us that heavy load of our sins which we could not bear, but
which You bore in Your own body on the tree, ransoming us from eternal death. Grant us patience and resignation in suffering
with You, that we may willingly take up our cross daily and fol low You through suffering to glory. Amen. 14 But 1 trust in you, I O
Lord I say, You I are my God. 15 My times are I in your hand rescue me from the hand of my enemies and from my perse-1
cutors! 16 Make your face shine on your I servant save me in your I steadfast love! 17 O Lord, let me not be put to shame, for I
call up-1 on you Reading the Psalms with Luther let the wicked be put to shame Let them go silently I to Sheol. 18 Let the lying I
lips be mute, : which speak insolently against the righteous in pride I and contempt. 19 Oh, how abundant is your goodness,
which you have stored up for those who I fear you and worked for those who take refuge in you, in the sight of the children of I
mankind! 20 In the cover of your presence you hide them from the l plots of men you store them in your shelter from the I strife
of tongues. 21 Blessed I be the Lord, for he has wondrously shown his steadfast love to me when I was in a besieged I city. 22 1
had said in my alarm, I am cut off I from your sight." But you heard the voice of my pleas for mercy when I cried to I you for help.
23 Love the Lord, all I you his saints!  The Lord preserves the faithful but abundantly repays the one who I acts in pride. 24 Be
strong, and let your heart take I courage, all you who wait I for the Lord! PRAYER Lord Jesus, who suffered men to slander You
and to bear false witness against You, yet did not open Your mouth save only to pray for Your tormentors, shed abroad Your
love in our hearts that we hate not them that hate us and speak evil against us, but enable us to love our enemies, being always
ready to suffer wrong for Your names sake. Amen. 76 Psalm 31 i s At this point we will stop pointing out in which com
mandment and which petition each individual psalm belongs. In the preceding, we have examples enough from which it may be
easily determined where each of the fol lowing psalms belong. Psalms of prayer belong in the Second Commandment and the
First Petition, for they praise Gods name and call on Him. Psalms of instruction, psalms of comfort, and psalms of thanks all
belong in the Third Commandment as well as the Second and in the First and Second petitions. For they hallow the true
Sabbath with true works and with true worship And many psalms often belong in all three commandments and petitions. We
have pointed these out so that we might learn well to use and understand the commands of God and the Lord's Prayer. We see
that the beloved saints and prophets spoke of and devoted themselves so abundantly and in such diverse ways to the first three
commandments and petitions. They always treated them anew and afresh, yet without having something new to leach, nor did
they go beyond the Tables of Moses and the Lords Prayer. From this we may understand that all the Scriptures and the holy
lives of the prophets proceeded from the com mands of God. The prophets lived in these commands, and unlike the false spirits
and teachers of human doctrine, they brought out no new leaching at all. Against the new' teach ings they cry and struggle the
hardest, so that the people might remain with the Commandments and the pure and clear Word of God. and so that false
teachings and other errors might always be prevented. 77 Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 32 r 32nd psalm is an
exemplary psalm of instruc tion that leaches us what sin is, and how one might be freed from it and be righteous before God.
Our reason does not know what sin is and tries to make satisfaction for it with works. But the psalmist says that even saints are
sinners. They cannot become holy or blessed except by confessing themselves as sinners before God, knowing that they are
regarded as righteous only from the grace of God, apart from any service or work. In short, our righteousness is called (in plain
language) the forgiveness of our sins. Or, as it says here: sins not counted, sins covered, sins not to be seen  Here stand the
clear plain words: All the saints are sinners and remain sinners. But they are holy because God in His grace neither sees nor
counts these sins, but forgets, forgives, and covers them. There is thus no distinction between the saints and the non-saints.
They are sinners alike and all sin daily, only that the sins of the holy are not counted but covered and the sins of the unholy are
not covered but counted. One would have a healing dressing on and is bandaged the other wound is open and undressed.
Nevertheless, both of them are truly wounded, truly sinners, concerning which we in our books in other places have abundantly
bore witness. cSU? 1 Blessed is the one whose transgression is for- I given. whose sin is 1 covered. 2 Blessed is the man
against whom the Lord counts no in-1 iquity, and in whose spirit there is I no deceit. Psalm 32 i For when 1 kepi silent, my bones
wast- I ed away through m groaning I all day long 4 For day and night your hand was heavy up- i on me my strength was dned
up as by the heat of I summer s 1 acknow ledged my sin to you, and I did not cover my in- I lquity I said. I will confess my
transgressions to the Lord. and you forgave the iniquity I of my sin 6 Therefore let everyone who is godly offer prayer to you at a
time when you l may be found: surely in the rush of great waters, they shall not i reach him. 7 You are a hiding place for me, you
preserve me from I trouble: you surround me with shouts of de- I live ranee. 8 1 will instruct you and teach you in the way I you
should go I will counsel you with my eye up- I on you. 9 Be not like a horse or a mule, without under- I standing. which must be
curbed with bit and bridle, or it w ill not stay I near you. ,0 Many are the sorrows of the I wicked. but steadfast love surrounds the
one who trusts I in the Lord. n Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice. O I righteous. and shout for joy, all you up- I nght in heart!
PRAYER O God. our heavenly Father, with whom is grace and much forgiveness, be merciful to us who were bom in sin and
cannot but sin and fall short every day. Forgive us our many transgressions and account them against us no more, but make us
Your heirs through Jesus Christ. Your beloved Son. who was delivered into death for our offences, and was raised again for our
justification. Amen. 79 Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 33 he 33rd psalm is a psalm of thanks to God in gen eral for His
blessings, for helping His faithful people in all kinds of distress, and for not letting them perish. He is able to help because He
made all things and still creates all things with a word, so that nothing is impossible with Him. God is also so good and true that
He will help and willing ly helps, as He has promised in the First Commandment: I will be your God, that is, 1 will be your
comfort, help, sal vation, life, and all good things, and 1 will stand against anything that would do you harm. Thats what it means
to be God. But the psalmist particularly thanks and praises the mighty blessing of God, that He guides the whole world, even the
hearts, thoughts, intentions, anger, and fury of the kings and princes, not as they will, but as He wills. And He finally frustrates all
their intentions, so that they accomplish nothing as they really want. What they intend to do against the righteous He immediatel
y turns aside and overthrows. This is the particular joy and comfort of His saints against the arrogant and overweening insolence
, the thrashing and threats of the raging nobles and the ruthless tyrants, who suppose that they can with threats devour all the
saints of God and hurl God Himself down from heaven. But before they have half begun, they lie in the dust. Consider the peo
ple of Sodom against Lot, Sennacherib the King, and our tyrants todayhow totally countless intentions have been dashed up till
now. Psalm 33 33 1 Shorn for joy in the Lord. O you  righteous' Praise befits the I upright. 2 Give thanks to the Lord i with the
lyre make melody to him with the harp of I ten strings! 3 Sing to him a new song play skillfully on the strings, with  loud shouts. 4
For the word of the Lord is i upright. and all his work is done in i faithfulness. 5 He loves righteousness and ' justice the earth is
full of the steadfast love i of the Lord. 6 By the word of the Lord the heav- I ens were made. and by the breath of his mouth ! all
their host. 7 He gathers the waters of the sea ! as a heap he puts the deeps in i storehouses. 8 Let all the earth I fear the Lord let
all the inhabitants of the world stand in i awe of him! 9 For he spoke, and it I came to be he commanded, and it I stood firm. ' The
Lord brings the counsel of the nations to I nothing he frustrates the plans of the I peoples. " The counsel of the Lord stands for- I
ever, the plans of his heart to all gener- I ations. 12 Blessed is the nation whose God I is the Lord, the people whom he has
chosen as his I heritage 1 13 The Lord looks down from l heaven he sees all the chil- I dren of man 14 from where he sits
enthroned he I looks our on all the inhabitants I of the earth. Reading the Psalms with Luther 15 he who fashions the hearts I of
them all and observes I all their deeds. 6 The king is not saved by his great I army a warrior is not delivered by his I great
strength. 17 The war horse is a false hope for sal-1 vation, and by its great might it cannot I rescue. 11 Behold, the eye of the
Lord is on those who I fear him, on those who hope in his I steadfast love, i that he may deliver their I soul from death and keep
them alive in I famine. 20 Our soul waits I for the Lord he is our help I and our shield. 21 For our heart is I glad in him, because
we trust in his I holy name. 22 Let your steadfast love, O Lord, be up-1 on us, even as we I hope in you. PRAYER We thank
You, Lord, for all the good that You have shown us from the days of our childhood. Continue to mul tiply Your mercies upon us,
keep us in Your fear and favor, cause us to walk in Your praise, protect us from all enemies, both visible and invisible, and grant
us, like Simeon of old, to depart in peace, through Christ, our Savior. Amen. Psalm 34 PSALM 34 c /ne 34th psalm is a psalm of
thanks, much like the preceding psalm. It offers us the history of David as an example for all the righteous so we might learn
from him that God never despises the cries of His saints. Moreover, it teaches us to fear God and no one else further, to be on
our guard against false teachers, against curses, grumblings, and slander. We should have patience, bless enemies rather than
curse them, wish them all good, do good to them rather than evil, and so (as much as in us lies) to live at peace with all people,
whether they are evil or godly. For it is certain (the psalmist says) that the righteous will suffer many things. It cannot be
otherwise. If you will be righteous, you must take up your cross and suffer. This is how it must be. On the other hand, it is certain
that the Lord will truly help us out of all these afflictions, that none of the least of your bones will be taken away or missing. Yes,
even the hairs of the head are numbered Although the bones of the saints in their martyrdom were often broken, some of them
burnt to ashes, and many more decaying in their graces, they will yet return and not remain eternally broken or be called broken.
Rather, for a time they will be broken, but afterward they will all again be more whole and healthy than they formerly were. This
is the first psalm that speaks about angels, that they attend to the righteous and wait on us. They are not simply with us or
around us. The angels are like an armyarmed soldiers encamped around us. pitching their tents, keeping watch, and fighting for
us against the devil and all his min ions. This is a great and excellent comfort for all who believe, as the prophet Elisha, following
this verse, made Reading the Psalms with Luther clear with his clear and correct example (2 Kings 6:17). But this verse is taken
from Genesis 32:1-2, where the angels encounter the patriarch Jacob, because of which he called that city army" or camp. For
they were his troops and camped around him as a protection, as the psalm here states. 34 11 will bless the Lord at I all times his
praise shall continually be I in my mouth. 2 My soul makes its boast I in the Lord ? let the humble hear I and be glad. 3 Oh,
magnify the I Lord with me, and let us exalt his name to-1 gether! 4 1 sought the Lord, and he I answered me and delivered me
from I all my fears. 5 Those who look to him are I radiant, and their faces shall never I be ashamed. 6 This poor man cried, and
the Lord I heard him ! and saved him out of all his I troubles. 7 The angel of the Lord encamps around those who I fear him, and
de-1 livers them. 8 Oh, taste and see that the I Lord is good! Bless&d is the man who takes ref-1 uge in him! 9 Oh, fear the Lord,
I you his saints, for those who fear him I have no lack! 10 The young lions suffer want and I hunger but those who seek the Lord
lack I no good thing. n Come, O chidren, lis-1 ten to me I will teach you the fear I of the Lord. 12 What man is there who de-1
sires life and loves many days, that he may I see good? Psalm 34 ,3 Keep your longue from i evil  and your lips from speak-1
mg deceit. u Turn away from evil  and do good seek peace and pur- l sue it. 15 The eyes of the Lord are toward the I righteous
and his ears i toward their cry. 16 The face of the Lord is against those who do I evil. ' to cut off the memory of them l from the
earth. 17 When the righteous cry for help, the I Lord hears 7 and delivers them out of all their I troubles. 18 The Lord is near to
the broken-1 hearted and saves the crushed in l spirit. 19 Many are the afflictions of the I righteous. but the Lord delivers him out
i of them all. 20 He keeps I all his bones  not one of them is I broken. 21 Affliction will slay the l wicked. and those who hate the
nghteous will I be condemned. 22 The Lord redeems the life of his l servants none of those who take refuge in him will I be
condemned MAY HR O God, Spirit of truth, who spoke of old by kings and prophets, enlighten the eyes of our understanding,
that we may read aright the psalms of Your servant David, learning from them that Jesus of Nazareth is He of whom the
Scriptures spoke. Cause us ever more clearly to see that He. and He alone, is the Savior of our souls, that our heart may cling to
Him alone. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther  -- PSALM 35 ne 35th psalm is a psalm of prayer in which David cries out
against the shameful people who, for the sake of their enjoyment and profit, put up a pretense and say what the rulers would
gladly hear. They defame the inno cent, embittering the rulers against them and inciting them to violence. They devour the truth
and cause great heartache. This happened to David, under Saul his king, when those whom he had treated well often afflicted
him out of their own malice. We take this as an example for our own time, when both in sermons and in books, by the princes
and in every placeour Gospel is so shamefully defamed with great lies beyond measure. Those whom we have served with all
due honor and respect do this, for the most part. Thus they ascend and are praised, while we are overthrown and descend to
the ground. This shameful, thankless, evil filthi ness is nothing but the abominable belly with its servants. In short, it happens (as
Christ said of His betrayer) that he who eats my bread betrays me with his feetand does so for thirty pieces of silver. Such are
the hypocrites, who for the sake of food will devour the righteous, as David here cries. 33 1 Contend, O Lord, with those who
con-1 tend with me, fight against those who fight a-1 gainst me! 2 Take hold of shield and I buckler and rise I for my help! 3
Draw the spear and javelin against my pur-1 suers! Say to my soul, I am your sal-1 vation! Psalm 35 4 Let them be put to shame
and dishonor who seek after I my life! Let them be turned back and disappointed who devise evil a- I gainst me!  Let them be like
chaff be-1 fore the wind/ with the angel of the Lord driving I them away! 6 Let their way be dark and I slippery/ with the angel of
the Lord pur- I suing them! 7 For without cause they hid their I net for me/ without cause they dug a pit I for my life. 8 Let
destruction come upon him when he does not I know it/ And let the net that he hid ensnare him, let him fall into itto his de- 
strucuon! 9 Then my soul will rejoice I in the Lord, exulting in his sal- I vation. 10 All my bones shall say, O Lord, who is I like
you/ delivering the poor from him who is too strong for him. the poor and needy from him who I robs him?" 11 Malicious
witnesses I rise up/ they ask me of things that I I do not know. 12 They repay me e- I vil for good/ my soul I is bereft. 13 But 1,
when they were sickI wore sackcloth I afflicted myself with I fasting/ 1 prayed with head bowed I on my chest. 14 1 went about
as though 1 gneved for my fnend or my I brother/ as one who laments his mother, I bowedthered/ they gathered together against
me wretches whom 1 did not know tore at me without I ceasing Reading the Psalms with Luther 16 like profane mockers I at a
feast,' they gnash at me I with their teeth. PKAYtR Lord Jesus, we give thanks that You bruised the head of the old serpent and
delivered us from his power. And because You have purchased us with Your holy blood, keep us Your own, and suffer not the
enemy to seduce our hearts. Let Your angels war against those who seek our soul, and drive them far from us. Amen. 17 How
long, O Lord, will you I look on? : Rescue me from their destruction, my precious life from the I lions! 18 1 will thank you in the
great congre-1 gation in the mighty throng I will I praise you. 19 Let not those rejoice over me who are wrongfully I my foes, and
let not those wink the eye who hate me with-1 out cause. 20 For they do I not speak peace, but against those who are quiet in
the land they devise words I of deceit. 2 They open wide their mouths a-1 gainst me they say, Aha, Aha! our eyes have I seen it!
22 You have seen, O Lord be not I silent! O Lord, be not I far from me! 23 Awake and rouse yourself for my vindi-1 cation, for my
cause, my God I and my Lord! 24 Vindicate me, O Lord, my God, according to your I righteousness, and let them not rejoice I
over me! 25 Let them not say in their hearts, Aha, our I hearts desire! Psalm 36 Let them not say. We have swal-1 lowed him up"
2  Let them be put to shame and disappointed altogether who rejoice at my ca-1 lamity!  Let them be clothed w ith shame and
dishonor who magnify themselves a-1 gainst me! 27 Let those who delight in my righteousness shout for joy and be glad and
say ! evermore,  Great is the Lord, who delights in the welfare of his i servant! 28 Then my tongue shall tell of your I righteousne
ss and of your praise all I the day long. PRAYER Lord, our God, who loves righteousness and hates iniq uity, restrain the
enemies of Your kingdom, destroy the devices of those who take counsel against Your truth, and stop the mouth of infidels and
blasphemers, that the king dom of Your Son, Jesus Christ, may be built, and righteous ness and truth may be spread abroad.
Amen. PSALM .it) he 36th psalm is a psalm of instruction that warns us to be on guard against false teachers, heretics, and
rebel lious spirits. These things the psalmist prays for at the end. In the middle of the psalm he gives us comfort that despite
everything. God's Word and kingdom will not be over thrown by means of their rabble. Instead it will stand in all the world like a
mountain that the Lord Himself establishes and like the deepest abyss that can be scooped out. The liv ing and comforting Word
shall thus remain in the house of God. Reading the Psalms with Luther The psalmist portrays this masterfully, saying: They are
an evil venomous people who, in the first place, receive Gods Word with total scorn and have no reverence for God at all. They
are proud, impudent, and self-secure, teaching whatever they please. Second, they do not praise or honor God but honor
themselves, while they slander all other teachers and bitterly revile them. In this they are masters, adorning themselves alone.
Nowhere else is there any Spirit, any God, any church. Third, their doctrine is nox ious, nothing but lies with which they contend
against the faith and doctrine of grace. They deceive the people with their false brilliance and their lies. In the fourth place, they
are rigid and stiff-necked, tolerating neither instruction nor admonishment. Their head is harder than any anvil. Yes, when they
see that someone reproves them rather than praising them, they bum and rage as the devil himself. In the fifth place, they
continually push on an increase, expanding their domain, as St. Paul says (2 Timothy 2:17), like gangrene. For they promote
their doctrine ten times more strongly and more diligently than the true teachers do, as if they would overturn everything in one
day. There is no day off or holiday with them. Finally, whenever possible they pursue and torment all those who do not go along
with them, and they do this without dread, but with total audaci ty and confidence, as if they were doing God a service thereby.
36 1 Transgression speaks to the wicked deep I in his heart there is no fear of God be-1 fore his eyes. 2 For he flatters himself
in I his own eyes that his iniquity cannot be found out and I hated. J The words of his mouth are trouble I and deceit he has
ceased to act wisely I and do good. Psalm 36 4 He plots trouble while I on his bed/ he sets himself in a way that is not good, he
does not reject I evil. 5 Your steadfast love, O Lord, extends to the I heavens/ your faithfulness I to the clouds. 6 Your righteousn
ess is like the moun-1 tains of God/ your judgments are like the great deep man and beast you save. I O Lord. 7 How precious is
your steadfast love. I O God! The children of mankind take refuge in the shadow I of your wings. 8 They feast on the abundance
I of your house/ and you give them dnnk from the river of I your delights. 9 For with you is the foun-1 tain of life/ in your light do 
we see light. 10 Oh, continue your steadfast love to those who I know you/ and your righteousness to the up- I right of heart! 11
Let not the foot of arrogance come up-1 on me/ nor the hand of the wicked drive I me away. 12 There the evildoers lie I fallen/
they are thrust down, unable I to rise. PRAYER Lord Jesus. Bishop and Shepherd of Your Church on earth, enlighten with Your
light all who err in the way. and restrain all those who conrupt Your Word and pervert Your counsel. Always grant to us pastors
that lead us away from the sterile sandbars of proud science, but to the verdant fields of Your Gospel, and create in us hearts
eager to receive Your saving truth. Amen. 9 / Reading the Psalms with Luther or PS AIM 57 CXne 37th psalm is a psalm of
comfort that teaches and exhorts us to have patience in the world and warns us, especially, against envy. For it is vexing and
painful to the weak in faith when things go so well for the godless and the opposite happens to those who fear God. It is a great
spiri tual virtue whenseeing the great misdeeds of the peas ants, the townspeople, the nobility, the princes, and every one who
has any powerone yet exerts himself not to blas pheme or inwardly wish this and that curse on them. Moreover, he still suffers
and sees that all things go well for them and they remain unpunished. Indeed, they are praised and honored, while the God-feari
ng are miserable, despised, hated, begrudged, obstructed, vexed, and perse cuted. The message is: Learn to have endurance.
Take your heart to God and do not let yourself be vexed. Do not become envious, or curse, or with evil to fall, or murmur, or look
at them with hatred. Let these people go and commend them to God, who will surely find all things out. The psalm teaches this
and comforts us in a variety of ways with abun dant promises, with examples, with warnings. For it is a great and difficult art to
manifest such patient longsuffering, when reason and all the heathen count envy as virtue. For it appears as though it were just
and fair to envy and begrudge the ungodly for their wantonness, their good fortune, and their riches. Psalm 37 37 1 Fret not
yourself because of evil-1 doers" be not envious of wrong- I doers! 2 For they will soon fade I like the grass and wither like the l
green herb. 3 Trust in the Lord, i and do good/ dwell in the land and befriend i faithfulness. 4 Delight yourself i in the Lord, and
he will give you the desires I of your heart. 5 Commit your way I to the Lord' trust in him, and I he will act. 6 He will bring forth
your righteousness I as the light, and your justice as the I noonday. 7 Be still before the Lord and wait patiently l for him fret not
yourself over the one who prospers in his way, over the man who carries out evil de-1 vices! 8 Refrain from anger, and for- I
sake wrath!' Fret not yourself it tends only to I evil. 9 For the evildoers shall be I cut off/ but those who wait for the Lord shall
inher- 1 it the land. 10 In just a little while, the wicked will I be no more/ though you look carefully at his place, he will I not be
there. 11 But the meek shall in-1 herit the land and delight themselves in a- 1 bundant peace. 12 The wicked plots against the I
righteous and gnashes his I teeth at him. 13 but the Lord laughs at the I wicked/ for he sees that his day is I coming. Reading the
Psalms with Li ther  The wicked draw the sword and I bend their bows to bring down the poor and needy, to slay those whose
way is i upright 15 their sword shall enter I their own heart,  and their bows shall be I broken. 6 Better is the little that the I
righteous has= than the abundance of many I wicked. ,7 For the arms of the wicked shall be I broken, but the Lord upholds the I
righteous. 18 The Lord knows the days of the ! blameless, and their heritage will remain for- I ever, 19 they are not put to shame
in I evil times in the days of famine they have a- I bundance. 20 But the wicked will perish the enemies of the Lord are like the
glory of the I pastures they vanishlike smoke they van- ! ish away. 21 The wicked borrows but does I not pay back. but the
nghteous is gener- I ous and gives 22 for those blessed by the Lord shall inher- I it the land, but those cursed by him shall I be
cut off. PRAYER Come, Spirit of the Father, make us Your temples, and so govern our hearts that envy and discontent may be
banished from us. Teach us godliness with contentment, that we may account food and raiment sufficient for this life, and may
devote our souls to seeking those treasures that thieves can not steal and rust will not corrode. Amen. 23 The steps of a man
are established 1 by the Lord, when he delights I in his way 24 though he fall, he shall not be cast I headlong. for the Lord up-1
holds his hand. 94 Psalm 37 25 I have been young, and l now am old," 1 yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken or his
children beg I ging for bread 26 He is ever lending I generously, 3  1 and his children become a I blessing. 27 Turn away from
evil  and do good so shall you dwell for- I ever. 28 For the Lord loves justice he will not forsake his saints. The are preserved tor-
I ever. but the children of the wicked shall I be cut oft 29 The righteous shall inher- I it the land and dwell upon it for I ever. 30
The mouth of the righteous utters I wisdom. and his longue speaks I justice. 31 The law of his God is I in his heart his steps I do
not slip. 32 The wicked watches for the I righteous and seeks to put I him to death. 33 The Lord will not abandon him I to his
power or let him be condemned when he is I brought to trial. 3  Wait for the Lord and keep his way. and he will exalt you to
inher- I it the land you will look on when the wicked I are cut oft. 35 1 have seen a wicked. I ruthless man, spreading himself like
a green I laurel tree. 36 But he passed away, and behold, he I was no more though I sought him, he could I not be found. 37
Mark the blameless and behold the I upright, for there is a future for the I man of peace. 38 But transgressors shall be altogether
I destroyed the future of the wicked shall I be cut off. Reading the Psalms with Luther 39 The salvation of the righteous is I from
the Lord he is their stronghold in the time of I trouble. 40 The Lord helps them and de-1 livers them he delivers them from the
wicked and saves them, because they take ref-1 uge in him. PRAYER Oh, may this bounteous God Through all our life be near
us. With ever joyful hearts And blessed peace to cheer us And keep us in His grace And guide us when perplexed And free us
from all ills In this world and the next! Amen. (LSB 895 2 )  - r ne 38th psalm is a psalm of prayer in which the psalmist laments
over his sins, on account of which his con science despairs and is greatly afflicted and can see nothing but Gods arrows, that is,
Gods anger, threats, death, and hell. These sorrows consume marrow and bone, strength PSALM 38 and fluids. They disfigure
the appearance and the complex ion and alter ones total understanding and demeanor. To truly feel one's sins and despair over
a guilty conscience is the torture above all torture. Moreover, outward persecutors add to this comfort, pursuing the righteous in
their con science and boasting that God is with them and against the righteous. And because God here holds back His comfort,
this terror in the heart follows, that God is angry with them on account of their sins. 96 Psalm 38 But for all that, the psalmist
teaches us to hold fast and not despair He teaches us to arm ourselves with prayer against their boasts, to lay claim to Gods
promise and take hold of it to the proper end, namely, that we be godly and righteous before God. Then the comfort of faith will
flow again. Likewise, we. too, should pray and not despair in any anxiety, even though we are sinners and feel sharply the
burden and assault of our sins. c ?9 1 O Lord, rebuke me not in your I anger." nor discipline me I in your wrath! 2 For your
arrows have sunk I into me. and your hand has come 1 down on me. 3 There is no soundness in my flesh because of your indig-
I nation" there is no health in my bones because I of my sin. 4 For my iniquities have gone o- I ver my head 1  like a heavy
burden, they are too hea- I vy for me. 5 My wounds stink and I fester because of my I foolishness, 6 1 am utterly bowed down
and I prostrate all the day 1 go about I mourning. 7 For my sides are Filled with I burning. 1  and there is no soundness I in my
flesh. 8 1 am feeble I and crushed 1  I groan because of the tumult I of my heart. 9 O Lord, all my longing is be- I fore you my
sighing is not hid- I den from you. ,0 My heart throbs my strength I fails me, and the light of my eyesit also has I gone from me.
11 My friends and companions stand aloof I from my plague, and my nearest kin stand I far off. Reading the Psalms with Luther
12 Those who seek my life lay their snares those who seek my hurt speak of I ruin and meditate treachery I all day long. 15 But I
am like a deaf man 11 do not hear, like a mute man who does not o-1 pen his mouth. 14 1 have become like a man who I does
not hear, and in whose mouth are I no rebukes. 15 But for you, O Lord, I do I wait it is you, O Lord my God, who will I answer. 16
For 1 said, Only let them not rejoice I over me, who boast against me when my I foot slips! 17 For I am read-1 y to fall, and my
pain is ever be-1 fore me. 18 1 confess my in-1 iquity I am sorry I for my sin. 19 But my foes are vigorous, they are I mighty, and
many are those who hate me I wrongfully. 20 Those who render me e-1 vil for good accuse me because I follow I after good. 21
Do not forsake me, I O Lord! O my God, be not I far from me! 22 Make haste to I help me, O Lord, my sal-1 vation! PRAYER
Lord, righteous and merciful God, do not punish us in Your hot displeasure, as we so richly deserve, but be gra cious to us
according to Your mercies, for we are poor and miserable. Do not remember the guilt of our many sins, but remember the
bloody merits of Your Son, Jesus Christ. Strengthen our hearts with the comforting ministrations of Your Spirit, and preserve us
in faith and hope unto our end. Amen. Psalm 39 or PSALM JV r  /he 39th psalm is a psalm of comfort. The psalmist prays that
God not let him murmur or become impatient, even though the godless live securely and accumulate goods as if they would
never die, while the godly are constantly plagued and punished on account of their sins. He desires rather that God would grant
him to think of how short and uncertain this life is, lest he join the ungodly and live with out fear of death in careless greed and
vain display. It is a great vexation and troubles many hearts that evil lives so confidently in notous living, but the godly are trou
bled and in misery. However, in the end, we find that the best of all is still to have the forgiveness of sins and a gra cious God,
who will help us out of any misery, as the psalmist here says and prays. 39  1 said, I will guard my ways, that 1 may not sin I
with my tongue I will guard my mouth with a muzzle, so long as the wicked are in my I presence. 2 1 was mute and silent 1 held
my peace to I no avail. 4 and my dis-1 tress grew worse. 3 My heart became hot within me. As I mused, the I fire burned then 1
spoke I with my tongue: 4 O Lord, make me know my end and what is the measure I of my days let me know how fleeting I I am!
5 Behold, you have made my days a few I handbreadths. and my lifetime is as nothing be-1 fore you. 99 Reading the Psalms
with Luther Surely all mankind stands as a I mere breath! 6 Surely a man goes about as a ! shadow! Surely for nothing they are
in I turmoil man heaps up wealth and does not know who will I gather! 7 And now, O Lord, for what I do I wait? My hope I is in
you. 8 Deliver me from all my trans-1 gressions. Do not make me the scorn I of the fool! 9 1 am mute 1 do not open I my mouth,
for it is you who have I done it. 10 Remove your I stroke from me I am spent by the hostility I of your hand. 11 When you
discipline a man with rebukes for sin, you consume like a moth what is I dear to him surely all mankind is a I mere breath! 12
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear to my cry hold not your peace I at my tears! For I am a sojourner with you, a guest, like all
my I fathers. 13 Look away from me, that I may I smile again, before 1 depart and I am no more! PRAYER Almighty God, who
lives forever, but has set bounds to our lives on this earth that we cannot pass, grant us true wis dom, that we set not our hearts
on earthly things, neither fol low after mammon, but seek first Your kingdom and the righteousness of Your Son. By the
operation of Your Spirit teach us to remember that we are but pilgrims on this earth, and help us to fix our hearts and hopes
above where Christ is, sitting on Your throne. Amen. Psalm 40 or PSALM 40 r 40ih psalm is a beautiful psalm of prayer in which
Chnst Himself laments His sufferings and calls for rescue from death It clearly prophesies that He alone does Gods will and
fulfills the Law. and that this is written about Him in the book of Moses. Christ dissolves and abolishes the old Law of sacrifices
and its holiness by which Gods will was not fulfilled. God alone does everything for us nothing is done by our work or sacrifices.
He therefore promises and establishes the New Testament in which the justification of the believers will be preached in the great
congregation, that is. in the entire world, and not the justifi cation by sacrifices or our works. For works and sacrifices make only
arrogant and false saints whose hope is not in God or in His grace, but in their lies and false holiness. 40 1 1 waited patiently I
for the Lord he inclined to me and I heard my cry. 2 He drew me up from the pit of destruction, out of the I miry bog, and set my
feel upon a rock, making my I steps secure. 3 He put a new song in my mouth, a song of praise I to our God  Many will see and
fear. and put their trust I in the Lord. 4 Blessed is the man who makes the I Lord his trust. who does not turn to the proud, to
those who go astray af- 1 ter a lie! Reading the Psai.ms with Luther 5 You have multiplied, O Lord my God, your wondrous
deeds and your thoughts toward us none can com-1 pare with you!  I will proclaim and tell of them, yet they are more than ! can
be told. 6 Sacrifice and offering you have not desired, but you have given me an I open ear  Burnt offering and sin offering you
have I not required. 7 Then 1 said, Behold, I I have come in the scroll of the book it is wnt-1 ten of me: 8 1 desire to do your will,
I O my God your law is with-1 in my heart 9 I have told the glad news of deliverance in the great congre-1 gation behold, I have
not restrained my lips, as you know, I O Lord. ,0 I have not hidden your deliverance within my heart 1 have spoken of your
faithfulness and your sal-1 vation I have not concealed your steadfast love and your faithfulness from the great congre-1 gation.
n As for you, O Lord, you will not restrain your mer-1 cy from me your steadfast love and your faithfulness will ever pre-1 serve
me! 12 For evils have encompassed me beyond number my iniquities have overtaken me, and 1 I cannot see they are more
than the hairs of my head my heart 1 fails me. 13 Be pleased, O Lord, to de-1 liver me! O Lord, make haste to I help me! 14 Let
those be put to shame and disappointed altogether who seek to snatch a-1 way my life let those be turned back and brought to
dishonor who de-1 sire my hurt! Psalm 41 is Let those be appalled because I of their shame who say to me, "A-1 ha. Aha! But
may all who seek you rejoice and be I glad in you may those who love your salvation say continually, Great I is the Lord! 17 As
for me, 1 am poor and needy, but the Lord takes I thought for me  You are my help and my deliverer do not delay, I O my God!
PRAYER We give thanks to You, Lord Jesus, for Your bitter suffer ing and painful death, whereby You purchased us from the
pangs of eternal death. Thanks be to You that You have sent us the Word of Your salvation. Preserve it with us pure and
unadulterated, and whenever we hear or read it, reveal Yourself to us as the Savior of our souls. Amen. PSALM 41 r he 41st
psalm is a psalm of prayer in which Christ Himself prophesies and laments over His betrayer, Judas, together with his
comrades, by whom He would be cruci fied. He prays that He would be raised up from death and that He might be elevated to
God's presence at His right hand. But Christ offers comfort for the multitudes by mak ing Himself into a sinner, though truly He
was without any sin. Thus He stands and declares Himself to be in our place, in our person, and He carries our sins as if they
were His own, as if He had committed them Himself. Reading the Psalms with Luther However, in the beginning of the psalm,
He declares a blessing for those who show regard for those in misery, that is, those who do not become offended at Jesus
Christ, the miserable crucified sinner, but hold fast to Him. For it is very offensive to believe that such a poor, condemned sin ner
should be raised so high that he may sit at the right hand of God. 4 / 1 Blessed is the one who consid-1 ers the poor! In the day
of trouble the Lord de- 1 livers him 2 the Lord protects him and keeps him alive he is called blessed i in the land you do not give
him up to the will of his I enemies. I The Lord sustains him on his I sickbed in his illness you restore him to I full health. 4 As for
me, I said, O Lord, be gra-1 cious to me heal me, for I have sinned a-1 gainst you! 5 My enemies say of me in I malice, When
will he die and his name I perish? 6 And when one comes to see me, he utters empty words, while his heart gathers in-1 iquity
when he goes out, he tells I it abroad. 7 All who hate me whisper together a-1 bout me they imagine the I worst for me. 8 They
say, A deadly thing is poured I out on him he will not rise again from I where he lies. 9 Even my close friend in whom 11 trusted,
who ate my bread, has lifted his heel a-1 gainst me. 10 But you, O Lord, be gra-1 cious to me, and raise me up, that I may re-1
pay them! II By this I know that you de-1 light in me: my enemy will not shout in triumph I over me. 24 Psalm 42 2 Bui you have
upheld me because ot my in- I tegrity.' and set me in your presence lor-1 ever. 13 Blessed be the Lord, the God of i Israel. lrom
everlasting to everlasting! Amen and i Amen MAYER Lord Jesus, who came to Your own and they received You not. grant us
Your Spirit to glorify You in our hearts. Enlighten our souls w ith this living knowledge that You are the power of God and the w
isdom of God. that we may never be offended in You. but ma hold Your righteousness in an unwavering faith, and may not be
ashamed to confess You before men. Amen. r  Xhe 42nd psalm is a psalm of prayer in which the psalmist laments over his
sorrow that God was angry with him and had afflicted him. Because of these he is mocked by the godless who taunt. Where is
your God now? For the godless cannot restrain themselves when they see that things go ill with the godly, they whistle, laugh,
and wink: "Ah. how rightly this comes to pass! So they say. "This is what happens to the heretics. When someone else is trou
bled, they know nothing else than that it is a sure sign of Gods anger. But when they are troubled, then it can have no other
meaning than that they are suffering for Gods sake and they must be Gods holy martyrs These wrongheaded, blind, and
poisonous guides for the blind will not under stand that God flogs His own people, yet comforts them again and does not desert
them. The psalmist on the other hand desires to come to God's house and be comforted by Reading the Psalms with Luther the
face of God. Thai is, he wants to truly hear Gods Word, which comforts him. For Gods house is that place where Gods Word is,
and Gods face is His presence through which He makes Himself known and, by means of His Word, reveals His grace.
Elsewhere in the Scripture (Jeremiah 2:27), it says to turn not your back, but your face toward God. 1 As a deer pants for I
flowing streams, so pants my soul for you, I O God. 2 My soul thirsts for God, for the I living God  When shall I come and appear
be- I fore God? 3 My tears have been my food I day and night, while they say to me continually, Where I is your God? 4 These
things I remember, as I pour I out my soul: how I would go with the throng and lead them in procession to the I house of God
with glad shouts and I songs of praise, a multitude keeping I festival. 5 Why are you cast down, O my soul, and why are you in
turmoil with-1 in me? Hope in God for I shall again praise him, my salvation 1 6 and my God. My soul is cast down with-1 in me
therefore I remember you from the land of Jordan and of Hermon, from Mount I Mizar. 7 Deep calls to deep at the roar of your I
waterfalls all your breakers and your waves have gone I over me. 8 By day the Lord commands his steadfast love, and at night
his song is I with me. a prayer to the God I of my life. /V6 Psalm 43 9 1 say lo God. my rock: Wh have you tor-1 gotten me? Why
do 1 go mourning because of the oppression of the I enemy ?" 10 As with a deadl wound in my bones, my adversaries I taunt
me, while they say to me continually, Where I is your God?" Why are you cast down, 0 my soul, and why are you in turmoil
with-1 in me 0  Hope in God: for 1 shall again praise him, my salvation I and my God. PR A YER You, O Lord, who are a God of
consolation, comlort and strengthen all struggling hearts, and set Your bounds to the malice of their tempters and tormentors.
Preserve and lead us in that way which You have mapped out lor us. that, tak ing up our cross daily, we may lollou in the
lootpnnts ot our Lord to eternal glory. Amen. and has nearly the same words in it. The psalmist desires also by light and truth to
come to God's house, that is. to be comforted in his misery by God's Word. 27 Reading the Psalms with Luther 43  Vindicate
me, O God, and defend my cause against an ungodly I people,' from the deceitful and unjust man de- 1 liver me! 2 For you are
the God in whom I take refuge, why have you re-1 jected me? ! Why do I go about mourning because of the oppression of the I
enemy ? 3 Send out your light and your truth let them I lead me let them bring me to your holy hill and to your I dwelling! 4 Then
I will go to the altar of God, to God my ex-1 ceeding joy. 1 and I will praise you with the lyre, O I God. my God. 5 Why are you
cast down. O my soul, and why are you in turmoil with-1 in me? Hope in God for I shall again praise him, my salvation I and my
God. PRAYER O Lord, God of the afflicted and of all who are suffering wrongfully, have compassion upon those tempted by
Satan and persecuted by the world. Comfort and strengthen both them and us by Your Word and Spirit, uphold us, and Finally
deliver us from all evil and receive us into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. /VS Psalm 44 or PSALM 44 r
44th psalm is a general psalm of prayer in which all the saints, especially the New Testament saints, lament that they are
persecuted by the heathen and tyrants and would be slaughtered. They cry out that God has given them over to this, as if He
had abandoned them. Formerly He had helped them with great wonders, and no harm came to them from persecutions. But
they are now even persecut ed on their own account, that is, for God's sake, as if they had done all kinds evil. In summary, this
psalm is the sigh ing of the spirit. It rebukes the flesh, which murmurs against God that it is judged unrighteous and is so poorly
governed (according to reason) that the godly, who ought to be helped, are allowed to suffer, and the evil, who ought to be
punished, are elevated. 44 1 O God, we have heard with our ears, our fathers have I told us. what deeds you performed in their
days, in the I days of old: 2 you with your own hand drove out the nations, but them you I planted you afflicted the peoples, but
them you I set free 3 for not by their own sword did they win the land, nor did their own arm I save them, but your right hand and
your arm, and the light of your face, for you de-1 lighted in them. 4 You are my King, I O God ordain salvation for I Jacob! 99
Reading the Psalms with Luther 5 Through you we push I down our foes through your name we tread down those who rise up
a-1 gainst us. 6 For not in my bow I do I trust, nor can my sword I save me. 7 But you have saved us I from our foes and have
put to shame those who I hate us. 8 In God we have boasted con-1 tinually, and we will give thanks to your name for-1 ever.
PRAYER Father of all mercy, we thank You for sending Your Son into our flesh to redeem us for Yourself. For the sake of His
obedience and suffering, grant us the forgiveness of all our sins and shortcomings, and keep us from the evil, as Your Son, our
Lord, prayed for us. Amen. 9 But you have rejected us and dis-1 graced us and have not gone out with our I armies. 10 You
have made us turn back I from the foe, and those who hate us have I gotten spoil. n You have made us like sheep for I slaughter
and have scattered us among the I nations. 12 You have sold your people for a I trifle, demanding no high I price for them. 13
You have made us the taunt of our I neighbors, the derision and scorn of those a-1 round us. 14 You have made us a byword
among the I nations, a laughingstock among the I peoples. 15 All day long my disgrace is be-1 fore me. and shame has cov-1
ered my face //f? Psalm 44 16 at the sound of the taunter and re-1 viler, at the sight of the enemy and the a-1 venger. 17 All this
has come upon us, though we have not for-1 gotten you, and we have not been false to your I covenant. 8 Our heart has I not
turned back, nor have our steps departed I from your way 19 yet you have broken us in the place of I jackals and covered us
with the shad-1 ow of death. 20 If we had forgotten the name I of our God or spread out our hands to a I foreign god, 21 would
not God dis-1 cover this? For he knows the secrets I of the heart. 22 Yet for your sake we are killed all the I day long we are
regarded as sheep to be I slaughtered. 23 Awake! Why are you sleeping, I O Lord? Rouse yourself! Do not reject us for-1 ever!
24 Why do you I hide your face? Why do you forget our affliction and op-1 pression? 25 For our soul is bowed down I to the dust
our belly clings I to the ground. 26 Rise up come I to our help! Redeem us for the sake of your I steadfast love! PRAYER Lord,
our gracious Father, at all times grant us Christian resignation to the order and guidance of Your protective care. Preserve us
from discontent under the cross, and from envy against those who enjoy prosperity. Lead us as You will, but when our end
comes, take us home to Yourself. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther - PSALM 45 r 45th psalm is a prophecy of the Gospel
and the kingdom of Christ, adorned with magnificent, splendid, and powerful words. For it portrays Christ as a kingwith all kingly
splendor, very handsome, well-spoken, well-adorned, well-armored, successful in war, righteous, gentle, gra cious, having
likewise a fine castle, a grand host of ladies- in-waiting, a beautiful queen, and children forever. This all is nothing else than a
spiritual picture of the Gospel of Christ, His Spirit, grace, Church, and eternal life, of war against sin, death, Law, devil, flesh,
world, and all evil. The psalm also clearly proclaims that the Old Testament shall come to an end. For it calls on the daughters to
forget their fathers house and people and call on this king as the one God, of which there is no other God. It gives Him also the
honor of the First Commandment, namely prayer, and it names Him clearly as the true God, acknowledging Him to be the
eternal king who rules in righteousness and lakes sins away. An eternal king can only be God Himself. This is, however, not the
time to speak further of these things.  My heart overflows with a pleasing theme 1 address my verses I to the king my tongue is
like the pen of a I ready scribe. 2 You are the most handsome of the sons of men grace is poured up-1 on your lips therefore
God has blessed you for- I ever. J Gird your sword on your thigh. O I mighty one, in your splendor and I majesty! //J Psalm 45 4
In your majesty ride out victoriously for the cause of truth and meekness and I righteousness/ let your right hand teach you I
awesome deeds! s Your arrows are sharp in the heart ot the king s I enemies the peoples fall I under you. 6 Your throne, O God,
is forever and ever. The scepter of your kingdom is a scepter of up-1 rightness 7 you have loved righteousness and hated I
wickedness. Therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness beyond your com- I panions  your robes are all
fragrant with myrTh and aloes and I cassia. From ivory palaces stringed instruments 1 make you glad 9 daughters of kings are
among your ladies of honor at your right hand stands the queen in gold of I Ophir. 10 Hear, O daughter, and consider, and in-1
cline your ear  forget your people and your I fathers house, n and the king will desire your I beauty  Since he is your lord, I bow
to him. 12 The people of Tre will seek your fa-1 vor with gifts, the richest of the I people. 13 All glorious is the princess in her
chamber, with robes interwoven I with gold. 14 In many-colored robes she is led to the king, with her virgin companions following
be- I hind her. 15 With joy and gladness they are I led along as they enter the palace I of the king. 16 In place of your fathers
shall I be your sons you will make them princes in I all the earth. Reading the Psalms with Luther 17 1 will cause your name to
be remembered in all gener-1 ations therefore nations will praise you forever and I ever. PRAYER Lord Jesus, our King and
Savior, make us Your citizens, and so guide and govern us that, as loyal subjects, we may serve You in true faith and a good
conscience all the days of our life. Adom our souls with Your righteousnessthe white robe in which we shall be found pleasing to
Your Father and worthy to dwell with Him. Amen. r S he 46th psalm is a psalm of thanks, sung by the people of Israel because
of the mighty deeds of God. He had protected and saved the city of Jerusalem, in which was His dwelling, against all the rage
and the fury of all the kings and the nations and preserved their peace against all warfare and weapons. And, in the manner of
the Scriptures, the psalm calls the character of the city a little stream that shall not run dry, as opposed to the great rivers, seas,
and oceans of the heathentheir great kingdoms, principalities, and domainsthat shall dry up and disappear. We, on the other
hand, sing this psalm the basis of Luthers hymn A Mighty Fortress to praise God for being with us. He miraculously preserves
His Word and Christendom against the gates of hell, against the rage of the devil, the rebellious spirits, the world, the flesh, sin.
death. Our little spring of water is also a living fountain, while their puddles, pools, and ponds become foul, mal odorous, and
dry. Psalm 46 46  God is our ref- I uge and strength.  a very present help in I trouble. 2 Therefore we will not fear though the I
earth gives way." though the mountains be moved into the heart l of the sea. 3 though its waters I roar and foam." though the
mountains tremble at its I swelling. 4 There is a river whose streams make glad the cil- I y of God. the holy habitation of the I
Most High 5 God is in the midst of her she shall I not be moved" God will help her when I morning dawns. 6 The nations rage,
the kingdoms I totter' he utters his voice, the I earth melts. 7 The Lord of hosts is I with us the God of Jacob is our I fortress. 8
Come, behold the works I of the Lord." how he has brought desolations I on the earth. 9 He makes wars cease to the end I of
the earth/ he breaks the bow and shatters the spear he bums the chariots I with fire. 10 Be still, and know that I I am God/ 1 will
be exalted among the nations. I will be exalted I in the earth!" n The Lord of hosts is I with us the God of Jacob is our I fortress.
PRAYER Thanks be to You, our Father, for all the mercy and truth that You have shown to us these many years. Grant Your
Word to dwell with us continually, defend Your Church against all her enemies, keep us in Your grace, and preserve for us
temporal and eternal peace through Your Son. Jesus Christ. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 47 c/hs, 47th psalm
is a prophecy of Christ, that He shall rise up and become king over all the world without a battle, simply through shouts, songs,
and trumpet calls, that is, through the joyful preaching of the Gospel, just as the walls of Jericho fell by trumpet blasts and
shouts, without any weapons at all. 47  Clap your hands, all I peoples! Shout to God with loud I songs of joy! 2 For the Lord, the
Most High, is I to be feared, a great king over I all the earth. 3 He subdued peoples I under us, and nations un-1 der our feet. 4
He chose our heritage I for us, the pride of Jacob I whom he loves. 5 God has gone up I with a shout, the Lord with the sound of
a I trumpet. 6 Sing praises to God, sing I praises! Sing praises to our King, sing I praises! 7 For God is the King of I all the earth
sing praises I with a psalm! 8 God reigns over the I nations God sits on his I holy throne. 9 The princes of the peoples gather as
the people of the God of I Abraham. For the shields of the earth belong to God he is highly ex-1 alted! Psalm 48 PRA YER
Thanks and praise to You, Lord Jesus Christ, for Your triumphant ascension to heaven, by which we know that Your work of
redemption is finished and mansions are pre pared for us in which we shall be Your associates forever. Draw our affections after
You that, dying to the world, we may look to those things which are above. Grant the light of Your Gospel to those sitting in
darkness, and spread Your kingdom to the remotest isles. Amen. PSALM 4H r he 48th psalm is a psalm of thanks, much like the
46th psalm. It also praises God for protecting and defend ing the city of Jerusalem against the kings and princes. They had to
retreat in shame and let the temple stand, along with the worship of God and His Word (or rule). With this God has kept His
promise, namely, that in accordance with the First Commandment, He would be their God. For. the psalm says, what we have
heard and believed, we also see and experience in Gods actions for the city. We also sing this psalm for Christendom and the
Gospel, that they will stand against the raging of the kings and princes, who finally withdraw in shameand the Word they still
must let remain. 4  1 Great is the Lord and greatly I to be praised in the city I of our God! His holy mountain , 2 beautiful in
elevation, is the joy of I all the earth, IVtADirNU me r 3AL.IVIO mm Mount Zion, in the far north, the city of the I great King. 3
Within her I citadels God has made himself known as a l fortress. 4 For behold, the kings as-1 sembled/ they came on to-1
gether. s As soon as they saw it, they were as-1 tounded they were in panic they I took to flight. 6 Trembling took hold I of them
there, ' anguish as of a woman in I labor. 7 By the I east wind you shattered the ships of I Tarshish. 8 As we have heard, so
have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city I of our God/ which God will establish for-1 ever. 9 We have thought on
your steadfast love, I O God/ in the midst of your I temple. ,0 As your name, O God, so your praise reaches to the ends I of the
earth. Your right hand is filled with I righteousness. n Let Mount Zion I be glad! Let the daughters of Judah rejoice because of
your I judgments! 12 Walk about Zion, go around her. number her I towers, 13 consider well her ramparts, go through her I
citadels, that you may tell the next generation 14 that this is God, our God forever and I ever. He will guide us for-1 ever. Psalm
49 PRAYER You, O God, upheld Your Church and defended it with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm against the violence
of tyranny and the wiliness of malice. Your protection extends over all. and Your name is great to the very ends of the earth.
Continue to show Yourself the God of Your people, convert their enemies or restrain their malicious counsels, and keep us in
Your faith and fear through Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALM 49 r he 49th psalm is a psalm of instruction against the great god of the
world, mammon by name. This psalm rebukes as great fools those who trust in the worldly gods rule and do not see that he
cannot deliver themor him selffrom death. Therefore, it is truly better to rely on God, who delivers from death and gives eternal
life, while they perish like the beast and leave all their goods behind, not knowing who will obtain it all. 49 1 Hear this, all I
peoples! Give ear, all inhabitants I of the world, 2 both I low and high, rich and poor to-1 gether! 3 My mouth shall speak I
wisdom the meditation of my heart shall be under-1 standing. 4 1 will incline my ear to a I proverb I will solve my riddle to the
music I of the lyre. Reading the Psalms with Luther 5 Why should 1 fear in limes of I trouble, when the iniquity of those who
cheat me sur-1 rounds me, 6 those who trust I in their wealth and boast of the abundance of their I riches? 7 Truly no man can
ransom an-1 other, or give to God the price ! of his life, 8 for the ransom of their life is I costly and can nev-1 er suffice, 9 that he
should live on for-1 ever and never I see the pit. 10 For he sees that even the I wise die the fool and the stupid alike must perish
and leave their wealth to I others. 11 Their graves are their homes forever, their dwelling places to all gener-1 ations, though
they called lands by their I own names. 12 Man in his pomp will I not remain he is like the beasts that I perish. n This is the path
of those who have foolish I confidence yet after them people approve I of their boasts. 14 Like sheep they are appointed for
Sheol Death shall be their  shepherd, and the upright shall rule over them in the morning. Their form shall be consumed in
Sheol, with no I place to dwell. ,s But God will ransom my soul from the power 1 of Sheol, for he will re-1 ceive me. 16 Be not
afraid when a man be-1 comes rich, when the glory of his house in-1 creases. Psalm 50 u For when he dies he will carry noth- l
ing away his glory will not go down I after him. ! For though, while he lives, he counts himself I blessed, and though you gel
praise when you do well I for yourself 19 his soul will go to the generation of his l fathers. 1 who will never again I see light. 20
Man in his pomp yet without under I standing is like the beasts that I pensh PR AYR R Lord, our God, preserve our hearts from
covetousness, and grant us true wisdom that we seek not after the treasures of this earth, nor put our trust in uncertain riches
Fill our hearts with contentment, that, satisfied with daily bread, we seek first the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ and inherit
with Him. Amen. PSALM 50 aim 50 is a psalm of instruction that tells us of the true worship of God and true sacrifice in contrast
to the false saints. They value their own sacrifices and worship highly, as if God must surely be thankful and indebted to them.
God. however, reverses this. He intends for His good ness and help to be so highly esteemed that we will be thankful and
indebted to Him. Likewise, when the psalm commands that vows be ful filled, this does not mean absurd self-chosen vows, but
those that are commanded in the Ten Commandments. // especially in the First and Secondthat we praise God, that we trust in
Him, call on Him, praise and thank Him as our only God, and the like. Of this, the raving saints and the hypocrites know nothing.
Mark well the clear words with which the psalm closes. The last verse leaches us that to call upon God in distress and thank Him
is the true worship, the most pleasing offer ing, and the right way to salvation. 1 The Mighty One, God the Lord, speaks and
sum-1 mons the earth from the rising of the sun to its I setting. 2 Out of Zion, the perfection of I beauty, God ! shines forth. 3 Our
God comes he does not keep I silence before him is a devouring Fire, around him a mighty I tempest. 4 He calls to the heav-1
ens above and to the earth, that he may judge his I people: 5 Gather to me my I faithful ones, who made a covenant with me by I
sacrifice! 6 The heavens declare his I righteousness, for God him-1 self is judge! 7 Hear, O my people, and I will speak O Israel,
1 will testify a-1 gainst you. I am 1 God, your God. 8 Not for your sacrifices do I re-1 buke you your burnt offerings are continuall
y be-1 fore me. 9 I will not accept a bull I from your house or goats I from your folds. 10 For every beast of the for- I est is mine.
the cattle on a I thousand hills. Psalm 50 111 know all the birds I of the hills, and all that moves in the I field is mine. i If I were
hungry, I would not I tell you, for the world and its full-1 ness are mine. u Do I eat the I flesh of bulls or drink the I blood of goats?
n Offer to God a sacrifice of thanks-1 giving, and perform your vows to the I Most High, is and call upon me in the day of I
trouble I will deliver you, and you shall glo-1 rify me." 16 But to the wicked I God says: What right have you to recite my statutes
or take my covenant I on your lips? 1 7 For you hate I discipline, and you cast my words be-1 hind you.  If you see a thief, you
are I pleased with him, and you keep company with a-1 dulterers. ,9 You give your mouth free rein for I evil, and your tongue I
frames deceit. 20 You sit and speak against your I brother you slander your own I mothers son. 2  These things you have done,
and I have been silent you thought that I was one I like yourself. But now I rebuke you and lay the charge be-1 fore you. 22 Mark
this, then, you who for-1 get God, lest I tear you apart, and there be none to de-1 liver! 23 The one who offers thanksgiving as
his sacrifice glo-1 rifles me to one who orders his way rightly 1 will show the salva-1 tion of God! Reading the Psalms with Luther
PRAYER Lord, our Savior, enlighten our eyes to know all Your mercies, and create in us such hearts that may be truly grate ful
to You. Forgive us our sins for the sake of the sacrifice of Your Son on the cross. Enlarge our hearts to walk in the way of Your
Commandments, and to pay to You the sacred vow made in Holy Baptism. Amen. PSALM 51 r  alm 51 is one of the foremost of
the psalms of instruction. In it David truly teaches us what sin is, where it comes from, what damage it doesand how one may be
freed from it. In this psalm, as nowhere else, it is clearly shown that sin is an inheritance, bom in us, and that no works can help
us against it, only Gods grace and forgive ness. Through His spirit. He creates us new again, as a new person, a new creation.
Otherwise, says David, sin with its terror and despair is so mighty that it even crushes the bones, until Gods grace comes to our
comfort. Afterward, when by grace and the Spirit we have again become new, then we not only learn how to praise, but actu ally
thank and praise Godyes, even suffer and bear the cross. All of this David calls true sacrifice and worship. He rejects all other
sacrifices that the raving saints bnng. He prays at the end that God might build up and preserve the city of Jerusalem to such
sacrifices and worship. Psalm 51  5 / 1 Have mercy on me, O God. according to your I steadfast love 1 according to your
abundant mercy blot out my trans- I gressions. 2 Wash me thoroughly from my in- I iquity. and cleanse me I from my sin! J For 1
know my trans- I gressions.  and my sin is ever be- I fore me. 4 Against you, you only, have 1 sinned and done what is evil I in
your sight, ! so that you may be justified in your words and blameless in your I judgment 5 Behold. I was brought forth in in- l
iquity. ! and in sin did my mother con- i ceive me. 6 Behold, you delight in tmth in the inward I being.  and you teach me wisdom
in the l secret heart 7 Purge me with hyssop, and 1 I shall be clean wash me, and I shall be whit- I er than snow.  Let me hear
joy and I gladness let the bones that you have bro-1 ken rejoice. 9 Hide your face I from my sins, and blot out all my in-1 iquities.
10 Create in me a clean heart. I O God. and renew a nght spirit with- I in me. n Cast me not away from your I presence. and lake
not your Holy Spirit I from me. 12 Restore to me the joy of your sal- I vation. and uphold me with a willing I spirit 1J Then I will
teach transgresssors I your ways. and sinners will re- I turn to you. 14 Deliver me from bloodguiltiness. O God. O God of my
sal-1 vation, and my tongue will sing aloud of your I righteousness. Reading the Psalms with Luther is O Lord, open I my lips,
and my mouth will de-1 clare your praise. 16 For you will not delight in sacrifice, or I would I give it you will not be pleased with a
burnt I offering. 17 The sacrifices of God are a broken I spirit a broken and contrite heart, O God, you will I not despise. 18 Do
good to Zion in your good I pleasure build up the walls of Je-1 rusalem 19 then will you delight in right sacrifices, in burnt
offerings and whole burnt I offerings then bulls will be offered on your I altar. PRAYER O God, our merciful Father, by Your Holy
Law do You work in us the true knowledge of our sin, that our heart may be penitent, and our soul humble before You. Blot out
our iniquities with the blood of Your Son, cleanse our souls from the dark spots with which we have soiled them, and comfort us
with the assurance of Your grace. Build Your Church with us and our children, that Your name may be glorified by many
generations. Amen. PSALM 52 52nd psalm is a psalm of comfort. As the title shows, it speaks of Doeg, who betrayed David and
shed much innocent blood (1 Samuel 22). He was a traitor and bloodthirsty dog, who slandered those who hope in Gods Word.
He reviled Gods servants and incited kings and princes to shed innocent blood. Despite such malevolent K26 Psalm 52 people,
this psalm brings comfort. It announces their reward, that they shall be removed from body, goods, house, and land. But the
godly shall remain and retain Gods house and His Word. 1 Why do you boast of evil, O I mighty man? The steadfast love of God
endures I all the day. 2 Your longue plots de- I struction, like a sharp razor, you worker I of deceit. 3 You love evil I more than
good. and lying more than speaking I what is right. 4 You love all words I that devour, O de-1 ceitful tongue. 5 But God will break
you down for-1 ever he will snatch and tear you from your lent he will uproot you from the land of the I living. 6 The righteous
shall I see and fear, and shall laugh at him, I saying, 7 See the man who would not make God his I refuge. but trusted in the
abundance of his riches and sought refuge in his own de-1 struction! 8 But 1 am like a green olive tree in the I house of God  1
trust in the steadfast love of God forever and I ever. 9 1 will thank you forever, because you have I done it. I will wait for your
name. for it is good, in the presence of the I godly. PRAYER Lord, righteous and almighty God, remember Your weath er-beaten
and tempest-tossed Church on this earth. Restrain her enemies, destroy their wiles, and hinder their violence. Preserve Your
saving truth to us and our children, and grant us to praise You with a joyful heart, now in the Church militant and forever in the
Church triumphant. Amen. PSALM 53 r 53rd psalm is a psalm of instruction and a prophecy, much like the 14th psalm. Both
have nearly the same verses and words. In brief, both of them rebuke the faithless work-saints, who persecute the true doctrine
and the true teachers. At the end, it proclaims the Gospel and kingdom of Christ, who shall come out of Zion. S3 1 The fool says
in his heart, There I is no God. They are corrupt, doing abominable iniquity there is none I who does good. 2 God looks down
from heaven on the chil-1 dren of man to see if there are any who understand, who seek I after God. 5 They have all fallen away
together they have be-1 come corrupt there is none who does good, not I even one. 4 Have those who work evil no I knowledge,
who eat up my people as they eat bread, and do not call up-1 on God? 5 There they are, in great terror, where there is no 1
terror! For God scatters the bones of him who encamps against you you put them to shame, for God has re-1 jected them. 6 Oh,
that salvation for Israel would come out of I Zion! When God restores the fortunes of his people, let Jacob rejoice, let Israel I be
glad. Psalm 54 HR AYER Lord, our Savior, fortify our hearts with the faith of Your Word against the foul contamination of the
infidelity of these last days, when folly is called science, and is lauded to the skies. Cause us to grow in faith, that our hearts may
be rooted and grounded in the saving truth of Your Word, through Jesus Christ. Amen. Gy- PSALM 54 r She 54th psalm is a
psalm of prayer against the persecutors who seek the life of the godly on account of the Word of God. Thus Saul and those in
Ziph had attempted to kill David on account of the Word of God, through which he had been called and consecrated to be king.
The psalmist prays for deliverance from his enemies and for vengeance upon them. 54 1 O God, save me, I by your name, and
vindicate me I by your might. 2 O God, I hear my prayer give ear to the words I of my mouth. 5 For strangers have risen against
me ruthless men I seek my life they do not set God be-1 fore themselves. 4 Behold, God is my I helper the Lord is the upholder I
of my life. 5 He will return the evil to my I enemies in your faithfulness put an I end to them. Reading the Psalms with Luther 6
With a freewill offering I will sacri- I fice to you 1 will give thanks to your name, 0 Lord, for I it is good. 7 For he has delivered me
from every I trouble, and my eye has looked in triumph on my I enemies. PRAYER Lord, our God, who desires not the death of
the wicked, convert those who hate us without a cause, and turn the hearts of those who persecute Your Christians. Protect the
poor and the innocent against the oppression of unjust men. Grant us patience under the cross, and preserve us in the true faith
to our end. Amen. PSALM 55 r S he 55th psalm is a psalm of prayer. Although it might have been spoken in the person of Christ
against His betrayer, Judas, 1 rather let it remain a general prayer against those vile alley cats who lick in front and scratch in
back. In appearance, they are such true friends, fathers, brothers, and sisters, so full of love and life compared to us, that their
mouth is smoother than butter and oil. But behind the scene is nothing but murder, sword, warfare, and the destruction of all, as
the psalm says here. That is, they can go with us to the table, to church, in house, on the street, and be the best of companions.
Therefore, the devil or death and hell may carry them away, for they create a great heartache and affliction for the people. This
curse, howev er, is a prophecythus it will certainly be with them, for they can say nothing better. Or rather, they do not change
and do not fear God." /90 Psalm 55  55  Give ear to my prayer, I O God. and hide not yourself from my plea for I mercy!  Attend
to me. and answer me I am restless in my complaint I and 1 moan. 3 because of the noise of the enemy, because of the
oppression of the I wicked. For they drop trouble up- I on me. and in anger they bear a grudge a- I gainst me. 4 My heart is in
anguish with- I in me the terrors of death have fallen up- Ion me. 5 Fear and trembling come up- I on me. and horror over- I
whelms me. 6 And I say, Oh. that I had wings I like a dove! I would fly away and I be at rest 7 yes. I would wander I far away I
would lodge in the I wilderness 8 I would hurry to find a I shelter from the raging wind and I tempest." 9 Destroy. O Lord, di- I
vide their tongues for I see violence and strife in the I city. 10 Day and night they go around it I on its walls. and iniquity and
trouble are with- I in it 11 ruin is I in its midst oppression and fraud do not depart from its I marketplace. 12 For it is not an enemy
who taunts me then I could I bear it it is not an adversary who deals insolently with methen I could I hide from him. 13 But it is
you, a man. my I equal, my companion, my fa- I miliar friend.  9 / Reading the Psalms with Luther m We used lo take sweet
counsel to-1 gether within Gods house we walked l in the throng. 15 Let death steal over them let them go down to She-1 ol
alive for evil is in their dwelling place and I in their heart. PRAYER Lord Jesus, who taught us to forgive those who trespass
against us, break and hinder in us the will of the flesh in its vindictiveness and pride. Instead, by Your love tor us enable us lo do
Your will, to truly love our enemies, and to freely forgive our offending brother as often as he asks us. Amen. 16 But 11 call to
God, and the Lord will I save me. 17 Evening and morning and at noon I utter my com-1 plaint and moan, and he I hears my
voice.  He redeems my soul in safety ffom the battle I that 1 wage, for many are arrayed a-1 gainst me. 19 God will give ear and
humble them, he who is enthroned I from of old, because they do not change and do I not fear God. 20 My companion stretched
out his hand a-1 gainst his friends he violated his I covenant. 21 His speech was smooth as butter, yet war was I in his heart his
words were softer than oil, yet they were 1 drawn swords. 22 Cast your burden on the Lord, and he will sus-1 tain you he will
never permit the righteous to I be moved. Psalm 56 But you. O God. w ill cast them down into the pit of destruction: men of
blood and treacherv shall not live out I halt their days. 4 But 1 will I trust in you. PRAYER O Lord, faithful God. behold how
faithfulness is dimin ished among the children of men. Guard us against the hurt ful deceit of w icked men. and grant us grace to
be true and faithful toward all. both friends and foes. Grant us wisdom to prove all things, that we ma not be earned away b the
cunning of men from the straight path of honest) and truth Amen. PSALM 56 C/he 56th psalm is a psalm of prayer in which
David laments over Saul and his men. who forced David to flee out of the land to the Philistines They pressed him so hard that
he had nowhere he could safely go. But David had the comfort of Gods Word and the promise and right of the kingship, though
they daily assailed it and opposed or even denied it. saying that he shall never be king, but rather Saul and his heirs. We pray
this psalm against our tyrants, who ceaselessly persecute Gods Word and us and allow no place for peace But we also have
this comfort, that we have Gods Word on our behalf, though they daily oppose, assail, and speak against that Word, saying that
we are heretics and they alone are the true church. M9 Reading the Psalms with Luther 56 1 Be gracious to me, O God, for man
tramples I on me all day long an attacker op- I presses me 2 my enemies trample on me I all day long, for many attack me I
proudly. 3 When 11 am afraid, 1 put my I trust in you.  In God, whose word I praise, in God I trust 1 shall not I be afraid.  What
can flesh I do to me? 5 All day long they in-1 jure my cause all their thoughts are against me for I evil. 6 They stir up strife, they
lurk they I watch my steps, as they have waited I for my life. 7 For their crime will I they escape? In wrath cast down the peoples,
I O God! 8 You have kept count of my tossings put my tears in your I bottle. Are they not I in your book? 9 Then my enemies will
turn back in the day I when I call. This 1 know, that God is I for me. 10 In God, whose I word 1 praise, in the Lord, whose I word I
praise, 11 in God I trust I shall not I be afraid. What can man I do to me? 12 1 must perform my vows to you, I O God I will
render thank offerings I to you. 13 For you have delivered my soul from death, yes, my feet from I falling, that I may walk before
God in the I light of life. Psalm 57 PRAYER Lord, our God. by Your mighty power and Your out stretched arm protect Your Word
and Church against all adversaries. Graciously preserve for us peace in Church and State, and grant us to be and remain
members of Your true, invisible Church, now in time and hereafter in eternity. Amen. or PSALM 57 r S he 57th psalm is a psalm
of prayer in which David once again complains about Saul and his servantswhen he crawled away from them into the cave. It
has the same meaning as the preceding psalm. Therefore, we would make use of it also against the tyrants and their venomous
coun selors and slanderers, who twist Gods Word against us. They have the fangs and tongue for such work, which are as
David saysspears, arrows, and sharp swords. But thanks be to God. who does not desert us. but hurls them into the pit that they
have prepared for us. Their plots finally come down on their own heads.  5 ?  Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me. for in
you my soul takes I refuge in the shadow of your wings 1 will take refuge, till the storms of destruction I pass by. 2 1 cry out to I
God Most High, to God who fulfills his pur-1 pose for me. Reading the Psalms with Luther I He will send from heaven and save
me he will pul lo shame him who tramples I on me. God will send out his steadfast love and his I faithfulness! 4 My soul is in the
midst of lions I lie down amid I fiery beasts the children of man. whose teeth are spears and arrows, whose tongues are I sharp
swords. 5 Be exalted, O God, above the  heavens! Let your glory be over I all the earth! 6 They set a net for my steps my soul
was I bowed down. 5 They dug a pit in my way, but they have fallen into it I themselves. 7 My heart is steadfast, O God, my
heart is I steadfast! I will sing and make I melody! 8 Awake, my glory! Awake, O I harp and lyre! I will a-1 wake the dawn! 9 1 will
give thanks to you, O Lord, among the I peoples I will sing praises to you among the I nations. 10 For your steadfast love is
great to the I heavens, your faithfulness I to the clouds. II Be exalted, O God, above the I heavens!" Let your glory be over I all
the earth! PRAYER God, who has commanded us to pray and has promised to hear, behold that we are not able and know not
how to pray as we should. Grant us Your Spirit, the Spirit of prayer, to teach us to pray in spirit and in truth, and to intercede for
us with sighings that cannot be uttered and whenever we pray, hear us from heaven. Your throne, through Jesus Christ. Amen.
/96 Psalm 58 /he 58th psalm is a psalm of comfort against the stiff-necked teachers who stubbornly carry through with their
error, stop up their ears, and never let themselves be corrected, but rather threaten to devour the godly Using five comparisons,
the psalmist comforts himself that they will not carry out their intentionsyes, they will not accomplish half of them: (1) There
comes at times a great flood with a temble roar, as if it would carry away every thing, but it flows away and does nothing (2) A
crossbow may be a severe threat, but when arrow, string, and bow are broken, it does nothing. (3) A slug stretches out it
antennae, but before it moves, it is dried up or melted away. (4) A still born child enlarges the mothers womb, as if it will come as
a baby, but dies before it sees the light. (5) A thorn bush may stick out with many spikes and threaten with pricks and scratches,
but before it becomes fully developed and hard, a raging hatchet descends on it and summons the thorns into the oven to
become ashes. Though all of these intended to be great and proceed with success, nevertheless nothing shall come from them. 
5  1 Do you indeed decree what is I right, you gods? Do you judge the children of man up-1 rightly? 2 No, in your hearts you
de-1 vise wrongs your hands deal out violence I on earth. 5 The wicked are estranged I from the womb they go astray from birth,
I speaking lies. 4 They have venom like the venom of a I serpent, like the deaf adder that I stops its ear. /sr IXCALnnVJ MIL. I
jru-ll J "Mil 5 so thal it does not hear the voice of I charmers or of the cunning en-1 chanter. 6 O God, break the teeth I in their
mouths tear out the fangs of the young lions, I O Lord! 7 Let them vanish like water that I runs away when he aims his arrows, let
them be I blunted. 8 Let them be like the snail that dissolves I into slime, like the stillborn child who never I sees the sun. 9
Sooner than your pots can feel the I heal of thorns, whether green or ablaze, may he sweep I them away! 10 The righteous will
rejoice when he sees the I vengeance he will bathe his feet in the blood of the I wicked. 11 Mankind will say, Surely there is a
reward for the I righteous surely there is a God who judges I on earth. PRAYER Lord, the supreme Judge over all the earth,
thanks be to You, because You judge equally and deal rightly with the children of men, abasing the wicked and exalting the
pious. Teach us to trust Your providence, and whether we rest on beds of ease or must wade through turbulent waters, grant us
grace always to say: The Lord is good and His ways are right. Amen. C-he 59th psalm is a psalm of prayer and can very well be
spoken in the person of Christ, who lamented over those who by their teachings stood arrayed against Him, to condemn and
disavow Him. Thereby they have their Psalm 59 reward: They come into the city at evening like hungry dogs, yet find nothing.
The psalm, however, can also be understood from the history of David against his "Saulites. who also are finally w ithout a
kingdom and wander around like hungry dogs until they are totally destroyed. For Sauls family never again came to the kingship,
though they strived for it with eagerness and effort. 59 1 Deliver me from my enemies. I O my God/ protect me from those who
rise up a- I gainst me 2 deliver me from those who work  evil/ and save me from blood-1 thirsty men. 3 For behold, they lie in
wait for my life fierce men stir up strife a-1 gainst me/ For no transgression or sin of mine. O Loro. 4 for no fault of mine, they run
and make I ready Awake, come to meet I me. and see! 5 You. Lord God of hosts, are God of I Israel. Rouse yourself to punish
all the I nations/ spare none of those who treacherously plot I evil. 6 Each evening they come back, howl-1 ing like dogs and
prowling about the I city. 7 There they are. bellowing with their mouths with swords I in their lips for Who. they think, "will I hear
us? 8 But you, O Lord. I laugh at them/ you hold all the nations in de-1 rision. 9 O my Strength. 1 will I watch for you/ for you. O
God. are my I fortress. ,0 My God in his steadfast love will I meet me/ God will let me look in triumph on my I enemies. 499
Reading the Psalms with Luther n Kill ihem not, lest my peo-1 pie forget make them totter by your power and bring them down,
O I Lord, our shield! 12 For the sin of their mouths, the words of their lips, let them be trapped I in their pride. For the cursing and
lies that they utter, 13 consume ! them in wrath consume them till they I are no more, that they may know that God rules over
Jacob to the ends I of the earth. M Each evening they come back, howling I like dogs and prowling about the I city. 15 They
wander a-1 bout for food and growl if they do not I get their fill. ,6 But 1 will sing of your strength 1 will sing aloud of your
steadfast love in the I morning. For you have been to me a fortress and a refuge in the day of I my distress. 17 O my Strength, I
will sing praises to you, for you, O God, are my I fortress, the God who shows me I steadfast love. PRAYER Help us Lord, our
God, to profit by the dire punishment that came upon the Old Testament Church, that we may strive to hate and torsake all
manner of evil. Grant us daily to live in penitence, that we may escape the deserved pun ishment and inherit the blessing of
Abraham, promised to the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. Amen. / 4 & Psalm b) r 60th psalm is a psalm of thanks in which David
thanks God thai He has given him an excellent kingdom in which God's Word was taught and there was good, order!)
government, w hich truly is a precious jewel Before David, in the tune of Saul, the government was disunited and chaotic, as the
first three verses declare The Philistines plagued them sorely, so that they did not take much care even tor the ark ot God (1
Chronicles 13). Evil things prospered, along with much unnghteousness. This is how it will always be where God is not at home
Davids example also points out that Saul had evil rogues in place in his court Yet (David says). God kept a banner, a sign, in
place tor His people, so they might rise up and praise Him Through it they could be sure and secure in His grace This sign was
the Tent of Moses and the ark of the covenant with the seat ot grace, which God also brought out of the land of the Philis tines
with great wonders. Before the ark they prayed and called on God and were accordingly delivered from their distress. Thereafter
, David lists his land and people, beginning with the holy sanctuary and Gods Word, then Shechem. Succoth, Gilead. Manasseh.
Ephraim. Judah. Moab. Edom. Philistia. Finally, he gives a confession concerning these things: To have a fortified city, that is. a
good peaceful gov ernment to have victory over Edom, that is. to prevail over people and land and in the middle of battle these
are not human accomplishments but gifts from God. Why he names no more lands or tribes than the nine he names belongs in a
commentary- rather than this summary . We also can say this psalm in praise of God. that He has extended His Church into the
whole world and into many parishes and seminaries, where each may have the Word of God and all have their various gifts. //
Reading the Psalms with Luther 66 ? 1 O God, you have rejected us, broken our de- I fenses you have been angry oh, re- I
store us. 2 You have made the land to quake you have tom it I open repair its breaches, for it I totters. 3 You have made your
people see I hard things you have given us wine to drink that made us I stagger. 4 You have set up a banner for those who I fear
you, that they may flee to it I from the bow. 5 That your beloved ones may be de- I livered, give salvation by your right hand and
I answer us! 6 God has spoken in his I holiness: With exultation 1 will divide up Shechem and portion out the Vale of I Succoth.
7 Gilead is mine Manasseh is mine Ephraim is my I helmet Judah is my I scepter. 8 Moab is my washbasin upon Edom I I cast
my shoe over Philistia I shout in I triumph. 9 Who will bring me to the fortified I city? Who will lead me to I Edom? 10 Have you
not rejected us, I O God? You do not go forth, O God, with our I armies. 11 Oh, grant us help a- I gainst the foe, for vain is the
salva- I tion of man! 12 With God we shall do I valiantly it is he who will tread I down our foes. /+2 Psalm 61 PRA YER Praise
and thanks be to You. our bountiful Father in heaven, for all the good You have shown to us and to our land. Preserve civil and
religious liberty to us and our chil dren. and grant peace and prosperity. Cause the kingdom of Your Son to flourish among us.
and keep us in the true and saving faith. Amen PSALM 61 c e 61st psalm is a psalm of prayer against the enemy on behalf of
the king and those in authority The psalm prays that they fear God. rule long and well, and that enemy and war not destroy
government. For. as Solomon said (cf. Proverbs 28:2): Because of the land's sin. man) princes perish But where there are many
rulers, it seldom fails that what one constructs, another breaks apart As the saying goes. New king, new law. This continuous
chang ing of the government is always dangerous and harmful, but it is well tor the land where an old, good system of govern
ment long continues. 6,y 1 Hear my cry, I O God. listen I to my prayer 2 from the end of the earth I call to you when my I heart is
faint. Lead me to the rock that is high- I er than I. J for you have been my I refuge. a strong tower against the I enemy. / Reading
the Psalms with Luther 4 Let me dwell in your tent for-1 ever! Let me take refuge under the shelter I of your wings! 5 For you, O
God, have I heard my vows you have given me the heritage of those who I fear your name. 6 Prolong the life I of the king may
his years endure to all gener-1 ations! 7 May he be enthroned forever be-1 fore God appoint steadfast love and faithfulness to
watch I over him! 8 So will 1 ever sing praises I to your name, as I perform my vows day I after day. PRAYER O God, King of
kings and Lord of lords, thanks be to You because You have given to our land good government. Endow the civil officers with
wisdom to rule this wide land prudently and with integrity to seek the good of the people. Preserve the liberty which we enjoy to
our children and our childrens children, and increase among us the kingdom of Your Son, Jesus Christ. Amen. / 4  Psalm 62
PSALM 62 r She 62nd psalm is a psalm of instruction concern ing the false confidence in human powers and the true con
fidence in God. There are many who, having the favor of a prince or a noble or the good will of the rich and powerful, think that
they need nothing more, then do much harm. Particularly, where they see a tottering wall, that is, when they notice that
someone is not well looked upon in the palace or else is in need and is persecuted by another so that he cannot defend himself,
then they all become knights, and they thoroughly flatter and play up to the great nobles. They do not see how entirely vain is
such trust in pnnces and also do not believe, until it happens, how thoroughly it shall col lapse. Therefore, it is said: Trust God.
and do wrong to no one who stands before God or men. 1 For God alone my soul waits in I silence from him comes my sal- I
vation. 2 He only is my rock and my salvation, my I fortress I shall not be greatly I shaken. 3 How long will all of you attack a
man to I batter him, 1 2 3 4 5 like a leaning wall, a I tottering fence? 4 They only plan to thrust him down from his high position.
They take pleasure in I falsehood  They bless with their mouths, but inwardly I they curse. 5 For God alone, O my soul, wait in I
silence, for my hope is I from him. Reading the Psalms with Luther 6 He only is my rock and my salvation, my I fortress  1 shall
not be I shaken. 7 On God rests my salvation and my I glory my mighty rock, my refuge I is God. 8 Trust in him at all times, O
people pour out your heart be-1 fore him God is a refuge I for us. 9 Those of low estate are but a breath those of high estate are
a de-1 lusion in the balances they go up they are together lighter I than a breath. 10 Put no trust in extortion set no vain hopes
on I robbery if riches increase, set not your I heart on them. 11 Once God has spoken twice have 11 heard this: that power
belongs to God, 12 and that to you, O Lord, belongs I steadfast love. For you will render I to a man according I to his work.
PRAYER Lord, our God, our sure refuge in need, grant us to love one another, and to honor and obey those You have placed
over us. But teach us by Your Spirit to trust alone in You, and not to make flesh our arms, that we may look to You alone for our
salvation through Jesus Christ. Amen. /46 Psalm 63 or PSALM 6.i 63rd psalm is a psalm of prayer in which David, when he had
to flee into the wilderness from Saul, desired to be in the holy place and hear Gods Word. He laments over the Saulites who
seek his life so that he can not come there and thus is deprived of the Word of God. But he meditates, nevertheless, on the
promise and God's choice of him to be king, and he comforts himself with these in the meantime. Now, however, this is a psalm
people can pray, those who hold only Gods Word under the tyrants and yet are depnved of that Word. They consider themselve
s still as Gods children and heirs because they have faith and love in His Word, until their Saul finds his end. 63 1 O God, you
are my God earnestly I I seek you 4 my soul thirsts for you my flesh faints for you, as in a dry and weary land where there is no I
water. 2 So I have looked upon you in the sanctu-1 ary, 4 beholding your power and I glory. 3 Because your steadfast love is
bet-1 ter than life, 4 my lips will I praise you. 4 So 1 will bless you as long I as I live in your name I will lift I up my hands. 5 My
soul will be satisfied as with fat and I rich food, and my mouth will praise you with I joyful lips. 6 when I remember you up-1 on
my bed, and meditate on you in the watches I of the night S4? Reading the Psalms with Luther 7 for you have I been my help/
and in the shadow of your wings I will I sing for joy. 8 My soul I clings lo you  your right hand up- I holds me. 9 But those who
seek to de-1 stroy my life shall go down into the depths I of the earth 10 they shall be given over to the power I of the sword they
shall be a portion for I jackals. 11 But the king shall re-1 joice in God all who swear by him shall exult, for the mouths of liars I will
be slopped. PRA YLR Thanks be to You, our most merciful Father in heaven, for the Word of Your Gospel, which is able to save
the soul. Grant Your saving truth to them that have it not, and cause Your light to shine on the nations sitting in the darkness of
idolatry. Through Your Word draw us to Your Son, that we may have life in Him. Amen. PSALM 64 he 64th psalm is a psalm of
prayer in which David prays against his betrayers and slanderers who made their case with poisonous words and evil malignity
in the worst wayas Absalom, Ahithophel, and the like, and Doeg before, in the court of Saul. But David has this com fort, that
their words would come down on themselves, and their tongues would bring down not David but them selvesas happened to
Absalom. Ahithophel. and Doeg. At Psalm t4 In like manner, we also pra against our betrayers among the courts of the princes,
bishops, and kings, who today undertake various evils, machinations, and tricks However, as has already often been seen,
these tncks come down on themselves, so that people will say. God has repaid them." 64  Hear my voice. O God, in I my
complaint. preserve my life from dread ol the I enemy 2 Hide me from the secret plots ol the i wicked.' from the throng of evil- I
doers.  who whet their I longues like swords/ who aim bitter words like I arrows. 4 shooting from ambush at the I blameless/
shooting at him suddenly and with- l out tear 5 They hold fast to their evil I purpose/ they talk of laying snares secretly , thinking,
who can I see them? 6 They search out injustice, saying. We have accomplished a dil- I igent search For the inward mind and
heart of a I man are deep! 7 But God shoots his ar- I row at them: they are wounded I suddenly. 8 They are brought to ruin, with
their own tongues turned a- I gainst them/ all who see them will I wag their heads. Then all I mankind fears/ they tell what God
has brought about and ponder what I he has done ,0 Let the righteous one rejoice in the Lord and take refuge I in him! Let all the
upright in I heart exult! /49 Reading the Psalms with Luther PRAYER Lord, Keeper of Israel, who alone is the tme Defense of
Your people, defend Your Church against the power of per secutors and the delusions of false prophets. Convert and make
Your enemies Your friends. And if any will harden their hearts in their perverse ways, bring their counsels to naught. Bless Your
inheritance, and cause the world to see that You judge righteously. Amen. PSALM 65 'he 65th psalm is a psalm of thanks in
which the psalmist praises God that He gives His Word and worship, as well as temporal peace. God regulates the fury of the
enemy and the wars in the land, which break out and storm like the sea, and He blesses the fields so everything turns out well,
produces well, grows well. Oh, how rare this praise is among the rabble, who abuse the Word of peace and prosperous times
and live a totally destructive life, as Sodom and Gomorrah did. It will turn out as well for them as it did for Sodom and Gomorrah.
1 Praise is due to you, O God, in I Zion, and to you shall vows I be performed.  O you who I hears prayer, to you shall I all flesh
come.  When iniquities prevail a-1 gainst me, you atone for our trans-1 grtssions. /.T/9 Psalm 65 4 Bless&d is the one you
choose and bring near, to dwell I in your courts! We shall be satisfied with the goodness of your house, the holiness of your I
temple!  By awesome deeds you answer us with righteousness, O God of our sal- I vation, the hope of all the ends of the earth
and of the i farthest seas 6 the one who by his strength established the I mountains, being girded I with might 7 who stills the
roanng of the seas, the roanng I of their waves, the tumult of the I peoples, 8 so that those who dwell at the ends of the earth are
in awe 1 at your signs. You make the going out of the morning and the evening to I shout for joy. 9 You visit the earth and water
it you greatly enrich it the river of God is full of I water you provide their grain, for so you have pre- I pared it. 10 You water its
furrows abundantly, settling its I ridges, softening it with showers, and bless-1 ing its growth. 11 You crown the year with your I
bounty your wagon tracks overflow with a- I bundance. 12 The pastures of the wilderness I overflow, the hills gird them- I selves
with joy, 13 the meadows clothe themselves with flocks, the valleys deck them- I selves with grain, they shout and sing together
I for joy. Reading the Psalms with Luther PRAYER Father of mercy, by Your gracious Spirit guide and gov ern us that we may
use Your spiritual and temporal gifts aright. Preserve the estates You have instituted both for the eternal salvation and the
temporal welfare of mankind, and by Your mighty arm hinder and destroy that revolutionary spirit of anarchy that would subvert
Your order, and keep us in Your Word. Amen. PSALM 66 r Xhe 66th psalm is a psalm of thanks for the gener al blessing that
God often delivers and protects His people out of the hand of the enemies, as He did at the Red Sea. The histories in the books
of the Judges and Kings are full of these deliverances, which He also does daily for us, delivering and keeping His own in the
true faith against the devil, spirits, and sins. 66  Shout for joy to God, I all the earth 2 sing the glory of his name give to him I
glorious praise! 5 Say to God, How awesome I are your deeds! So great is your power that your enemies come cringing I to you.
4 All the earth worships you and sings prais-1 es to you they sing praises I to your name. Psalm tt s Come and see what I God
has done:  he is awesome in his deeds toward the chi I - i dren of man  He turned the sea into I dry land: : they passed through
the riv- 1 er on toot There did we rejoice in him. 7 who rules by his might forever, whose eyes keep watch on the I nations let not
the rebellious ex- I alt themselves. 8 Bless our God. O I peoples f let the sound of his I praise be heard, 9 who has kept our soul
among the I living'' and has not let our I feet slip 10 For you. O God. have I tested us' you have tried us as sil- I ver is tried. n You
brought us in- I to the net you laid a crushing burden i on our backs ,2 you let men ride o- I ver our heads we went through fire
and through water, yet you have brought us out to a place of a- I bundance n 1 will come into your house with burnt I offerings' I
will perform my I vows to you, 14 that which my lips I uttered and my mouth promised when 1 was in I trouble ,5 1 will offer to
you burnt offerings of fattened animals, with the smoke of the sacri- I fice of rams: 11 I will make an offering of I bulls and goats.
16 Come and hear, all you who I fear God," and 1 will tell what he has done I for my soul 17 1 cried to him I with my mouth. and
high praise was I on my tongue. /SJ Reading the Psalms with Luther 18 If I had cherished iniquity I in my heart, the Lord would
not have I listened. 19 But truly God has I listened he has attended to the voice I of my prayer. 20 Blessed I be God, because he
has not rejected my prayer or removed his steadfast I love from me! PRAYER Thanks and praise be unto You, God of all grace,
because You have delivered our souls from the bondage of Satan, and have saved us through the Red Sea of the blood of Your
Son, Jesus Christ, our Savior. Cleanse us evermore with His blood that, with all Your saints, we may continually praise You.
Amen.  PSALM 67 C--/he 67th psalm is a prophecy of Christ, that He shall be king the whole world over and rule the people
rightly, that is, rule them with the Gospel, that they may be freed from sin to live for Him in righteousness and thank Him with joy.
As we have often stated, this is the new and proper worship of God. For He does not say that the Gentiles shall circumcise
themselves and run to Jerusalem, but rather that they will remain Gentiles and nevertheless give thanks to God, be joyful, and
fear Him, that is, worship Him. /S4 Psalm 67 67 1 May God be gracious to us and I bless us and make his face to shine up- I on
us, 2 that your way may be I known on earth. your saving power among all I nations. J Let the peoples praise you, I O God let all
the peoples I praise you! 4 Let the nations be glad and I sing for joy, for you judge the peoples with equity and guide the nations
up- I on earth. 5 Let the peoples praise you, I O God let all the peoples I praise you! 6 The earth has yielded its I increase God.
our God. shall I bless us. 7 God shall I bless us let all the ends of the earth I fear him! PRAYER Praise and thanks be to our God
for calling us of the Gentiles into the kingdom of His dear Son. and making us partakers of His grace and salvation. May He
grant us grace to walk worthy of the Gospel whereby we are called, and to serve Him in joy and gladness all our days, through
Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen. /cW Reading the Psalms with Luther or PSALM 6H r X he 68th psalm is a beautiful and powerful
prophe cy of Christ, that He shall rise, ascend to heaven, give His Spirit, send His apostles, let the Gospel be preached, rescue
poor sinners from death, comfort the sorrowful, destroy the Jewish kingdom and priesthood and scatter them, and estab lish a
new kingdom in which He will daily be praised and preached, and not the Law of Moses. The psalm calls the apostles kings and
lords of armies and leaders in battle because, with the Gospel, they do battle against death, sin, and the devil, against the
wisdom and holiness of the world. Likewise, it calls them high fruitful mountains, Gods heirs, and Gods chariots with many hosts.
It also calls them singers and choruses among the maidens, dancers, and singersbecause they joyfully praise, glorify, and thank
God. Thus David sings his song of joy over the holy king dom of grace and life. He prays at the end that God keep His kingdom,
bless it, and establish it to eternity. The psalmist is so completely and joyfully stirred in spirit that he has written this beautiful and
rich psalm. dTd? 1 God shall arise, his enemies shall be I scattered, and those who hate him shall flee be-1 fore him! 2 As
smoke is driven away, so you shall drive I them away as wax melts before fire, so the wicked shall perish be-1 fore God! 3 But
the righteous shall be glad they shall exult be-1 fore God, they shall be jubilant I with joy! Psalm 68 4 Sing to God, sing praises I
to his name 1 lift up a song to him who rides through the deserts his name is the Lord exult be-1 fore him! 5 Father of the
fatherless and protector of I widows" is God in his holy habi-1 tation. 6 God settles the solitary in a home he leads out the
prisoners to pros- I perity/ but the rebellious dwell in a I parched land. 7 O God, when you went out before your I people. 1 when
you marched through the I wilderness,  the earth quaked, the heavens poured down rain, before God. the One of I Sinai. 1
before God, the God ol I Israel. 9 Rain in abundance, O God, you I shed abroad 1 you restored your inheritance as it I languishe
d 10 your flock found a dwell- I ing in it 1 in your goodness, O God, you provided for the I needy. 11 The Lord I gives the word 1
the women who announce the news are a I great host: 12 The kings of the armiesthey I flee, they flee 1 The women at home
divide the I spoil 11 though you men lie among the I sheepfolds the wings of a dove covered with silver, its pinions with I
shimmering gold. u When the Almighty scatters I kings there/ let snow fall on I Zalmon. ,s O mountain of God, mountain of I
Bashan/ O many-peaked mountain, mountain of I Bashan! 16 Why do you look with hatred. O many-peaked I mountain/ at the
mount that God desired for his abode, yes, where the Lord will dwell for-1 ever? Reading the Psalms with Lither 17 The chanots
of God are twice ten thousand, thousands upon I thousands/ the Lord is among them Sinai is now in the sanctu- I ary. 18 You
ascended on high, leading a host of captives in your train and receiving gifts a- I mong men/ even among the rebellious, that the
Lord God may I dwell there. HRA YER Glory and praise and honor belong to You, Lamb of God, because You were slain and
have redeemed us to God by Your blood, and have led our captivity captive. Pour out Your Spirit upon the dry soil of our hearts
that He may cause faith and love to spring up in them and to bring fruit unto eternal life. Amen. 19 Blessed be the Lord, who
daily I bears us up/ God is our sal-1 vation. 20 Our God is a God of sal-1 vation, and to God, the Lord, belong deliverances l
from death. 21 But God will strike the heads of his I enemies/ the hairy crown of him who walks in his I guilty ways. 22 The Lord
said, I will bring them back from I Bashan/ I will bring them back from the depths I of the sea. 23 that you may strike your feet I in
their blood/ that the tongues of your dogs may have their portion I from the foe. 24 Your procession is seen, I O God/ the
procession of my God, my King, into the sanctu-1 ary 25 the singers in front, the mu-1 sicians last/ between them virgins playing
I tambourines: Psalm 68 26 Bless God in the great congre- i gallon. the Lord. O you who are of Israel's I fountain 1 ' 27 There is
Benjamin, the least of them, in the lead, the princes of Judah I in their throng. the princes of Zebulun, the princes of i Naphtali 2
Summon your power, i O God. the power, O God, by which you have i worked for us. 29 Because of your temple at Je-1
rusalem kings shall bear l gifts to you 30 Rebuke the beasts that dwell among the reeds, the herd of bulls with the calves of the I
peoples. ' Trample underfoot those who lust after tribute, scatter the peoples who de-1 light in war 31 Nobles shall come from I
Egypt/' Cush shall hasten to stretch out her I hands to God. 32 O kingdoms of the earth. I sing to God:' sing praises I to the Lord.
33 to him who rides in the heavens, the ancient 1 heavens. behold, he sends out his voice, his ! mighty voice. u Ascribe I power
to God,' whose majesty is over Israel, and whose power is I in the skies. 35 Awesome is God from his sanctu- l ary: the God of
Israelhe is the one who gives power and strength to his people. Blessdd I be God' PRAYER Hold Thou Thy cross before my
closing eyes: Shine through the gloom, and point me to the skies. Heav'ns morning breaks, and earth's vain shadows flee In life,
in death, O Lord, abide with me Amen Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 69 c/he 69th psalm is a psalm of prayer in the
person of Christ as He spoke on the cross in His suffering. He con fesses in our place and laments for His crucifers and slan
derers who, in His great thirst, gave Him gall and vinegar to drink. (So clearly and openly He speaks of His suffering to come.)
Then He prophesies of the homble delusion, hard ness of heart, and ultimate defeat of the Jews, which has all come about, as
we can still see and sorrow over. Finally, He announces also the new worship. He says, I will praise the name of God . . . and
magnify Him with thanksgiving. This worship shall put an end to the old, for it pleases God belter than all bulls and the best
offerings one can provide, as the psalm here says. 69 1 Save me, I O God! For the waters have come up I to my neck. 2 1 sink
in deep mire, where there is no I foothold I have come into deep waters, and the flood sweeps I over me. J I am weary with my
crying out my I throat is parched  My eyes grow dim with waiting I for my God. 4 More in number than the hairs 1 of my head 
are those who hate me with- I out cause mighty are those who would destroy me, those who attack I me with lies. What 1 did not
steal must I I now restore? 5 O God, you know my I folly the wrongs l have done are not hid- I den from you. / 6 & Psalm  Let not
those who hope in you he put to shame through me, O Lord ' God ol hosts: let not those who seek you he brought to dishonor
through me. O God of l Israel. 1 For it is tor your sake that I have I home reproach/ that dishonor has covered I my face 8 1 have
become a stranger to mv I brothers/ an alien to my I mother's sons. 9 For zeal lor your house has con-1 sumed me/ and the
reproaches ol those who reproach you have fall-  en on me. 10 When 1 wept and humbled my soul with I tasting.  it became I my
reproach n When I made sackcloth my I clothing. 4 1 became a byword I to them 12 1 am the talk ol those who sit l in the gale/
and the drunkards make songs a- I bout me ,J But as tor me. my prayer is to you. I O Lord. 1 At an acceptable lime. O God. in
the abundance of your steadfast love answer me in your saving I faithfulness 14 Deliver me from sinking I in the mire/ let me be
delivered from my enemies and from the deep I waters. Let not the flood sweep over me. or the deep swal- I low me up/ or the
pit close its mouth I over me. 16 Answer me. O Lord, for your steadfast I love is good/ according to your abundant mercy. I turn
to me. 17 Hide not your face from your servant, for I am I in distress/ make haste to I answer me. 18 Draw near to my soul, re-1
deem me/ ransom me because of my I enemies! Reading the Psalms with Luther 19 You know my reproach, and my shame and
my dis-1 honor my foes are all I known to you. PRAYER Thanks to You, Friend of our souls, because You did bear our sins in
Your own body on the tree, that by Your stripes we might be healed. Let Your cross be our comfort, and strengthen our faith to
confess Your name upon earth, never to be ashamed of You or of Your Word. Amen. 20 Reproaches have broken my heart, so
that 1 am I in despair. I looked for pity, but there was none, and for comforters, but 11 found none. 21 They gave me poi- I son
for food, and for my thirst they gave me sour I wine to drink. 22 Let their own table before them be-1 come a snare and when
they are at peace, let it be-1 come a trap. 23 Let their eyes be darkened, so that they I cannot see, and make their loins tremble
con-1 tinually. 24 Pour out your indignation up- I on them, and let your burning anger over-1 take them. 25 May their camp be a
deso-1 lation let no one dwell I in their tents. 26 For they persecute him whom you have I struck down, and they recount the pain
of those you have I wounded. 27 Add to them punishment upon I punishment may they have no acquittal I from you. 28 Let them
be blotted out of the book of the I living let them not be enrolled among the I righteous. Psalm 69 29 But 1 am afflicted I and in
pain let your salvation, O God, set I me on high! jo 1 will praise the name of God I with a song I will magnify him with thanks- I
giving. n This will please the Lord more I than an ox or a bull with I horns and hoofs. 32 When the humble see it they I will be
glad you who seek God, let your I hearts revive. 33 For the Lord hears the I needy and does not despise his own people who are
! prisoners. 34 Let heaven and earth I praise him, the seas and everything that I moves in them 35 For God will save Zion and
build up the cities of I Judah, and people shall dwell there and pos- I sess it 36 the offspring of his servants shall in- I hern it. and
those who love his name shall I dwell in it. PRAYER Lord Jesus, by Your own mercy You thirsted for our sal vation before the
foundations of the earth were laid, and in the fullness of time You took on our flesh and suffered thirst on the cross, that Your
thirst for our souls might be stilled. Grant us the water of life, preserve us from ingratitude, and take not the Word of Your
salvation from us. Amen. ASS Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 70 r  ne 70ih psalm is a psalm of prayer against the
persecutors and enemies of the godly. With fist and deed, with counsel and wishes in the heart, with word and cry that is, with
earnestness and all diligencethey seek to take the life of the godly because of Gods Word. 1 Make haste, O God, to de-1 liver
me! O Lord, make haste to I help me! 2 Let them be put to shame and confusion who I seek my life! Let them be turned back
and brought to dishonor who de-1 sire my hurt! 3 Let them turn back because I of their shame who say, A-1 ha. Aha! 4 May all
who seek you rejoice and be I glad in you! May those who love your salvation say evermore, I God is great! 5 But I am poor and
needy hasten to me, I O God! You are my help and my deliverer O Lord, do I not delay! PRAYER It is proper and right for all on
earth to give glory to You, O Father of mercy, because You sent Your Son to war against, and to overcome, our enemies.
Endow us with strength and fortitude never to despair in the strife with the powers of darkness, but at all times grant us victory
and per severance through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord. Amen. /64 Psalm 71 PSALM 71 le 71st psalm is (by my understan
ding) a psalm of prayer spoken from beginning to end in the person of all Christendom against all enemies and affliction. It prays
especially concerning the time of old age. when one becomes feeble and gray. That is. it prays for the last Christians, tor whom
the times will be dangerous, and when faithtogether with the Gospelwill be cast down. In the same way, Daniel also proclaimed
that the truth would be cast down and unrighteousness shall conquer. Therefore, the psalmist praises Gods righteousness
alone, which he has learned from God since his youth, or since the beginning. May this be a comforting prophecy for us, that
Gods Word shall return before the end of the world. With this Word God will call us from the depths of the earth and mightily
comfort us. From this basis comes also the gener al statement concerning Christ: that Elijah and Enoch shall come, the lies of
the antichrist shall be exposed, and all shall again be set right. 7 / 1 In you. O Lord, do I take I refuge 2 3 4 let me never be I put
to shame! 2 In your righteousness deliver me and I rescue me incline your ear to me, and I save me! 3 Be to me a rock of
refuge. to which I may contin-1 ualy come you have given the command to save me. for you are my rock and my I fortress. /tJc
Reading the Psalms with Luther 4 Rescue me, O my God, from the hand of the I wicked from the grasp of the unjust and I cruel
man. 5 For you, O Lord, I are my hope, my trust, O Lord, I from my youth. 6 Upon you I have leaned from before my birth you
are he who look me from my I mothers womb. My praise is continually I of you. 7 1 have been as a portent to I many, but you
are my strong I refuge. 8 My mouth is filled I with your praise, and with your glory I all the day. 9 Do not cast me off in the time of
I old age forsake me not when my I strength is spent. 10 For my enemies speak con-1 ceming me those who watch for my life
consult together 11 and say, God has for-1 saken him pursue and I seize him, for there is none to de-1 liver him. 12 O God, be
not I far from me O my God, make haste to I help me! n May my accusers be put to shame I and consumed with scorn and
disgrace may they be covered who I seek my hurt. PRAYER Lord Jesus, who in Your childhood set an example for the young to
follow, by Your Holy Word teach our children, and all the rising generation, the beginning of wisdom, which is the fear of God.
Cause our young men and women to shun the byways of vanity and vice, and to walk in the straight path of godliness and virtue,
and make them orna ments of Your Holy Church. Amen. A56 Psalm 71 H Bui 1 will hope con-1 tinually and will praise you yei I
more and more. ii My mouth will tell of your righteous acts, of your deeds of salvation I all the day, for their number is past my I
knowledge. i6 With the mighty deeds of the Lord God I 1 will come. I will remind them of your righteousness, I yours alone  7 O
God. from my youth you have I taught me. and 1 still proclaim your I wondrous deeds i So even to old age and gray hairs. O
God, do not for-1 sake me. until 1 proclaim your might to another generation, your power to all I those to come.  9 Your righteous
ness, O God, reaches the high I heavens. You who have done great things. O God, who is I like you? 20 You who have made
me see many troubles and calamities will revive I me again from the depths of the earth you will bring me I up again. 21 You will
increase my I greatness and comfort I me again. 22 1 will also praise you with the harp for your faithfulness, I O my God I will
sing praises to you with the lyre, O Holy One of I Israel. 23 My lips will shout for joy, when I sing prais-1 es to you my soul also,
which you I have redeemed. 24 And my tongue will talk of your righteous help all I the day long, for they have been put to shame
and disappointed who sought to I do me hurt. Reading the Psalms with Luther PRAYER Lord, our Father in heaven, thanks be
to You that You awakened Your servant Martin Luther to once more restore to Christendom the Gospel of Your Son, Jesus
Christ, and have preserved unto us the knowledge of Your saving truth. Grant us hearts to appreciate Your truth, that we may
stead fastly continue in Your Word, and may escape the snares of these evil days. Amen. PSALM 72 r 72nd psalm is an
exceedingly magnificent and beautiful prophecy of Christ and His rule in the whole world. In this kingdom, neither sin nor the evil
conscience shall flower and reign (as under the Law) but only righ teousness, freedom, and joy of conscience. However, this is
not without the cross. On account of the cross, their blood shall be shed and counted as very precious to God. And the psalm
also announces the new worship, which is to call on God and to thank Him. He tells us to pray to God daily and daily to praise
Him. This is our daily offering among all the Gentiles. At this time we hear M<V aanO xexNtg i  eiw u{, z ont1wo0Â´aNW
eBÃ¸MohLaw of Moses, but rather that they remain kings and Gentiles and receive this king as truly God by nature, call on Him,
and glorify Him. For to call on God in distress and to thank Him for His help is the worship that alone pleases Him, who is alone
our helper in need and our Savior. Without Him, all else is no help at all. AS Psalm 72  Give the king your justice, I O God. and
your righteousness to the I royal son! 2 May he judge your people with l righteousness, and your poor with  justice! 3 Let the
mountains bear prosperity for the I people, and the hills, in I righteousness! 4 May he defend the cause of the poor of the people,
give deliverance to the children of the I needy, and crush the op-1 pressor! s May they fear you while the I sun endures, and as
long as the moon, throughout all gener-1 ations! 6 May he be like rain that falls on the I mown grass, like showers that wa-1 ter
the earth! 7 In his days may the righteous I flourish, and peace abound, till the moon I be no more! 8 May he have dominion from
I sea to sea, and from the River to the ends I of the earth! 9 May desert tribes bow down be-1 fore him and his enemies I lick the
dust! 10 May the kings of Tarshish and of the coastlands render him I tribute may the kings of Sheba and Seba I bring gifts! 11
May all kings fall down be-1 fore him, all nations I serve him! 12 For he delivers the needy I when he calls, the poor and him who
has no I helper. 13 He has pity on the weak and the I needy, and saves the lives of the I needy. 14 From oppression and
violence he re-1 deems their life, and precious is their blood I in his sight. Reading the Psalms with Luther 15 Long may he live
may gold of Sheba be giv-1 en to him! May prayer be made for him continually, and blessings invoked for him I all the day! 16
May there be abundance of grain in the land on the tops of the mountains may it wave may its fruit be like I Lebanon and may
people blossom in the cities like the grass I of the field! 17 May his name endure forever, his fame continue as long I as the sun!
May people be blessed in him, all nations call him I blessed! ,a Blessed be the Lord, the God of I Israel, who alone does I
wondrous things. 19 Bless&d be his glorious name for-1 ever may the whole earth be filled with his glory! Amen and I Amen!
PRAYER To You, our heavenly Father, we lift up our hearts with joyous thanks, because You have granted us the knowledge of
Your Son, Jesus Christ, in whom we have everlasting life. Preserve in us this saving knowledge, that we may hear His voice with
joy, and may go with Him into His eternal king dom. Amen. Psalm 73 r 73rd psalm is a psalm of instruction against the great
vexation that the godless are rich and everything goes well for them. They ridicule the poor and afflicted saints as if God neither
knew nor regarded them. They con sider only themselves and their holy works and what they taught and said as precious,
heavenly, and godly wisdom and holiness. This causes much pain, so that the psalmist says, I was brutish and ignorant.. .
toward You, that is, I was called a godless heretic and despiser of God. Then, he says: Slop! Go into the sanctuary and hear
what Gods Word says of them. Look at the former examples in the his tories, and you will find that they all at once come to noth
ing, for there is no ground or foundation under them, but only slippery footing. 73 1 Truly God is good to I Israel, to those who
are I pure in heart. 2 But as for me, my feet had almost I stumbled, my steps had I nearly slipped. 3 For I was envious of the I
arrogant when I saw the prosperity of the I wicked. 4 For they have no pangs I until death their bodies are I fat and sleek. 5 They
are not in trouble as I others are they are not stricken like the rest of I mankind. 6 Therefore pride is their I necklace violence
covers them as a I garment. Reading the Psalms with Luther 7 Their eyes swell out through I fatness their hearts overflow with I
follies. 8 They scoff and speak with I malice loftily they threaten op-1 pression. 9 They set their mouths against the I heavens,
and their tongue struts I through the earth. 10 Therefore his people turn I back to them, and find no I fault in them. 11 And they
say, How can I God know? Is there knowledge in the I Most High? u Behold, these are the I wicked always at ease, they
increase in I riches. 13 All in vain have I kept my I heart clean and washed my hands in I innocence. 14 For all the day long I
have been I stricken and rebuked every I morning. 15 If I had said, I will I speak thus, I would have betrayed the generation of
your I children. PRAYER Lord, the only wise God, whose thoughts and ways are as high above ours as the heavens are high
above the earth, hidden are Your ways, and Your guidance often beyond our searching out. Work in us such hearts that do not
murmur against Your judgments, but are always ready to say: You are the Lord, my God, and You do all things well. Amen.
Psalm 73 16 But when I thought how to under- l stand this/ it seemed to me a I wearisome task, 17 until I went into the sanctuary
I of God/ then I dis-1 cemed their end. 18 Truly you set them in slippery I places/ you make them fall to I ruin. 19 How they are
destroyed in a I moment," swept away utterly by I terrors! 20 Like a dream when I one awakes/ O Lord, when you rouse yourself,
you despise them as I phantoms. 21 When my soul was em-1 bittered/ when I was I pncked in heart, 22 I was brutish and I
ignorant/ I was like a I beast toward you. 23 Nevertheless, 1 am continually I with you you hold my I right hand. 24 You guide me
with your I counsel, r and afterward you will receive me to I glory. 25 Whom have I in I heaven but you 9  And there is nothing on
earth that I desire be-1 sides you. 26 My flesh and my I heart may fail, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion for-1
ever. 27 For behold, those who are far from you shall I perish you put an end to everyone who is unfaithful I to you. 78 But for
me it is good to be I near God I have made the Lord God my refuge, that I may tell of I all your works. /Z3 Reading the Psalms
with Luther PR A YER Lord, our God. You have a counsel of mercy over us by which You desire to lead us to those mansions
prepared for us by Jesus, our Savior. You see that we are ignorant, and often know now what is for our good. By Your grace
restrain us from thrusting our hand into Your clockwork and thwart ing Your counsel. In all things grant us resignation to Your
will, that we may reach the home of the soul with Christ, our Lord. Amen. PSALM 74 r ne 74th psalm is a psalm of prayer
against the enemies who had laid waste Jerusalem, the temple, and all the schools of God in the land, together with the cities.
Moreover, they slandered God, saying He could not help His people. However, the psalm appears as if it were a prayer against
the destruction still to come, that is, of the Babylonians and thereafter by Antiochus Ephiphanes. For only in these two instances
was the temple in Jerusalem and the land destroyed. Accordingly, we pray this psalm against those who devastate Christendom
, tear up Gods Word, Sacraments, and all of Gods ordinances, and thus clearly preach abomination and slander, and who
continue every where. Psalm 74 74t 1 O God, why do you cast us off for- I ever? Why does your anger smoke against the sheep
of your I pasture? 2 Remember your congregation, which you have purchased of old, which you have redeemed to be the tribe
of your I heritage! Remember Mount Zion, where I you have dwelt. 3 Direct your steps to the perpetual I ruins the enemy has
destroyed everything in the sanctu- I ary! 4 Your foes have roared in the midst of your I meeting place they set up their own I
signs for signs. 5 They were like those who swing I axes in a for-1 est of trees. 6 And all its I carved wood they broke down with
hatchets and I hammers. 7 They set your sanctuary I on fire they profaned the dwelling place of your name, bringing it down I to
the ground. 8 They said to themselves, We will utterly sub- I due them they burned all the meeting places of God I in the land. 9
We do not I see our signs there is no longer any prophet, and there is none among us who I knows how long. 10 How long, O
God, is the I foe to scoff? Is the enemy to revile your name for-1 ever? 11 Why do you hold back your hand, your I right hand?
Take it from the fold of your garment and de- I stroy them! Reading the Psalms with Luther PRAYER Lord Jesus Christ, Your
powr make known, For You are Lord of lords alone Defend Your holy Church that we May sing Your praise eternally. Amen.
(Z-sa655:2) 12 Yet God my King is I from of old, working salvation in the midst I of the earth. 15 You divided the sea I by your
might you broke the heads of the sea monsters on the I waters. h You crushed the heads of Le-1 viathan you gave him as food
for the creatures of the I wilderness. 15 You split open 1 springs and brooks you dried up ever-1 flowing streams. 16 Yours is the
day, yours al-1 so the night you have established the heavenly lights I and the sun. 1 7 You have Fixed all the boundaries I of
the earth you have made summer and I winter. Remember this, O Lord, how the en- 1 emy scoffs, and a foolish people re-1
viles your name. 19 Do not deliver the soul of your dove to the I wild beasts do not forget the life of your poor for-1 ever. 20 Have
regard for the I covenant, for the dark places of the land are full of the habitations of violence. 21 Let not the downtrodden turn I
back in shame let the poor and needy I praise your name. 22 Arise, O God, de-1 fend your cause remember how the foolish
scoff at you I all the day! Psalm 75 23 Do not forget the clamor I of your foes, the uproar of those who rise against you, which
goes up con- I tinually! PRAYER O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, our covenant God, You have promised us the cleansing from
sin in the blood of the Lamb, and have obligated Yourself to be a merciful Father to us. Grant us the Spirit of faith, that we may
trust the Word of Your covenant, and not doubt Your faithfulness through Christ, our Lord. Amen. CP" PSALM 75 r X ne 75th
psalm is a psalm of comfort against the stiff-necked, proud, godless teachers who are self-secure and presume on their office,
as if they need fear nothing, neither threat nor punishment. As Psalm 73 above has writ ten: Who shall be our teacher? We are
the teachers! We sit in the office, we have the power, and all must obey us or be excommunicated as heretics. So also today our
secure princes and the rebellious spirits sit as spiritual and world ly tyrants, thinking that God Himself can neither see nor
overthrow them. But this psalm says otherwise. It gives us the comfort that we should look forward to the judgment when the
god less will be judged and pass away. The earth and all its inhabitants will shake and tremble nevertheless God will preserve
the pillars, that is, the godly who bear and preserve this world, as St. Paul (1 Timothy 3:15) calls the Church a foundation and a
pillar of truth. Thus God preserved Lot when He overthrew Sodom, and He preserved the believing Reading the Psalms with
Luther Jews wiih the apostles when He destroyed the Jewish nation. For He well knows how to deliver His own when He
destroys a land. z& 1 We give thanks to you, O God we give thanks, for your I name is near. We recount your I wondrous deeds.
2 At the set time that I I appoint 1 will judge with I equity. 3 When the earth totters, and all its in-1 habitants, it is I who keep
steady its I pillars. 4 1 say to the boastful, I Do not boast, and to the wicked, Do not lift I up your horn 5 do not lift up your I horn
on high, or speak with I haughty neck. " 6 For not from the east or I from the west and not from the wilderness comes I lifting up.
7 but it is God who executes I judgment, putting down one and lifting up an-1 other. 8 For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup
with foaming wine, well mixed, and he pours I out from it, and all the wicked of the earth I shall drain it down I to the dregs. 9 But
I will declare it for- I ever I will sing praises to the God of I Jacob. 10 All the horns of the wicked I will I cut off, but the horns of the
righteous shall be I lifted up. Psalm 76 PRA YER O God, let us hear when our Shepherd shall call In accents persuasive and
tender. That while there is time we make haste, one and all. And find Him, our mighty defender. Have mercy upon us, O Jesus!
All trials shall be like a dreams that is past, Forgotten all trouble and mourning. All questions and doubts have been answered at
last. When rises the light of that morning. Have mercy upon us, O Jesus! Amen, usb sio 2 . PSALM 76 he 76th psalm is a psalm
of thanks, similar to the 46lh psalm. For it gives thanks that God has His dwelling. Word, and worship in Jerusalem and that He
magnificently protects His people from being devoured by the kings and the rage of warriors such as Sennacherib. God knew'
how to take courage away from princes and make them discour aged. In the same way He fights against our enemies. As strong
and as evil as they may be, it is hard to defend them selves against God, who takes away at once their heart and courage. Even
the devil flees when his courage fails him. What then can flesh and blood do? Such a warrior-God must be praised, who deals
thus with the noise of kings. He can save His own without a sword, by fright and fear alone. /79 Reading the Psalms with Luther
?6 1 In Judah I God is known 4  his name is great in I Israel. 2 His abode has been established in I Salem, his dwelling place in I
Zion. J There he broke the Hashing I arrows/ the shield, the sword, and the weap-1 ons of war. 4 Glorious are you, more ma-1
jestic  than the moun-1 tains of prey. 5 The stouthearted were stripped of their spoil they sank I into sleep all the men of war
were unable to I use their hands. 6 At your rebuke, O God of I Jacob, both rider and I horse lay stunned. 7 But you, you are I to
be feared! Who can stand before you when once your an-1 ger is roused? 8 From the heavens you uttered I judgment the earth
feared I and was still, 9 when God arose to establish I judgment, to save all the humble I of the earth. 10 Surely the wrath of man
shall! praise you the remnant of wrath you will put on I like a belt. 11 Make your vows to the Lord your God and per-1 form them
let all around him bring gifts to him who is I to be feared, 12 who cuts off the spirit of I princes, who is to be feared by the kings I
of the earth. 80 Psalm 77 HR A YER Thanks to You, Lord Jesus, for planting Your Gospel at this place, and gathering a Church
that continues in Your Word. Drive far from us the indifference and apathy of these latter evil days. Cause our hearts to bum with
zeal for the truth of Your Word, and preserve Your doctrine true at this place, that our children after us may be still praising You.
Amen. PSALM 77 e 77th psalm is a psalm of instruction. The psalmist uses himself as an example of how to find comfort when
affliction comes and the conscience is troubled, as if God is angry with it. He says that he was so troubled that he could not have
any sleep or even speak. But this comfort follows: The psalmist can fight off the thoughts with which he futilely suffered, and he
can grasp instead the thought of the mighty works of God in the histories of old. Here we find that Gods work was to help the
miserable, the trou bled, and the abandoned, and to throw down the self-secure, proud scoffer, for example, when He delivered
the children of Israel from Egypt. For this reason His paths are called hidden. He is there to help when we think that we are
totally abandoned. We should learn this well. God intends by this psalm to show us and teach us His manner of helping, namely
that he never abandons us when things go ill. Instead, we should wait upon His help at that time with the greatest confidence
and not believe our thoughts. Reading the Psalms with Luther 77 1 I cry a-1 loud to God, aloud to God, and he will I hear me. 2
In the day of my trouble 11 seek the Lord in the night my hand is stretched out without wearying my soul refuses to be I
comforted. 3 When I remember I God, I moan when I meditate, my I spirit faints. 4 You hold my eyelids I open I am so troubled
that 11 cannot speak. 5 I consider the I days of old, the years I long ago. 6 1 said, Let me remember my song in the night let me
meditate I in my heart. Then my spirit made a dil-1 igent search: I Will the Lord spurn for-1 ever, and never again be I favorable?
8 Has his steadfast love for-1 ever ceased? Are his promises at an end I for all time? 9 Has God forgotten to be I gracious? Has
he in anger shut up his com-1 passion? 10 Then I said, I will ap-1 peal to this, to the years of the right hand of the I Most High. II
I will remember the deeds 1 of the Lord yes, I will remember your won-1 ders of old. 12 1 will ponder I all your work, and
meditate on your I mighty deeds. 33 Your way, O God, is I holy. What god is great I like our God? 14 You are the God who
works I wonders you have made known your might among the I peoples. Psalm 77 5 You with your arm redeemed your 1
people, the children of Jacob and i Joseph. 16 When the waters saw you, O God, when the waters saw you, they I were afraid
indeed, the deep I trembled. 17 The clouds poured out water the skies gave forth I thunder your arrows flashed on I every side.
18 The crash of your thunder was in the whirlwind your lightnings lighted I up the world the earth trem- I bled and shook. 19 Your
way was through the sea, your path through the great I waters yet your footprints I were unseen. 20 You led your people I like a
flock by the hand of Moses and I Aaron. PRAYER God of all comfort, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, grant the consolations
of Your Holy Spirit to all comfortless and afflicted souls. Make us to be rooted and grounded in faith, armed with the breastplate
of Christs righteousness, furnished with the helmet of an unwavering hope, and pro vided with the sword of the Spirit, the Word
of Truth, by which we shall triumph over all enemies. Amen. RhADING THh PSAl MS WITH Ll'IHhR lSAI M 7H he 78th psalm is
a psalm of instruction. Using the example and history of the entire people of Israel from the beginning until David, it leaches us
to trust and to believe in God, and it warns us against mistrust and faithlessness. The psalm declares the punishment that
follows faithlessness and the grace that comes with trust. 7 ?  Give ear, O my people, to my I teaching' incline your ears to the
words I of my mouth! 2 1 will open my mouth in a I parable I will utter dark sayings I from of old, 3 things that we have I heard
and known, " that our fathers have I told us. 4 We will not hide them from their children, but tell to the coming generation the
glorious deeds of the Lord, I and his might, and the wonders that I he has done. 5 He established a testimony in Jacob and
appointed a law in I Israel, which he commanded our fathers to teach to their I children, 6 that the next generation might know
them, the children I yet unborn, and arise and tell them to their I children, 7 so that they should set their I hope in God and not
forget the works of God, but keep his com-1 mandments /? Psalm 78 8 and that they should not be like their fathers, a stubborn
and rebellious gener-1 ation, a generation whose heart was not steadfast, whose spirit was not faith-! ful to God. 9 The
Ephraimites, armed I with the bow, turned back on the day of I battle. 10 They did not keep Gods I covenant, but refused to walk
according I to his law. 11 They for-1 got his works and the wonders that he had I shown them. 12 In the sight of their fathers he
performed I wonders in the land of Egypt, in the I fields of Zoan. 13 He divided the sea and let them I pass through it, and made
the waters stand I like a heap. 14 In the daytime he led them I with a cloud, and all the night with a I fiery light. 15 He split rocks
in the I wilderness and gave them drink abundantly as I from the deep. 16 He made streams come out I of the rock and caused
waters to flow down like I rivers. 17 Yet they sinned still more a-1 gainst him, rebelling against the Most High in the I desert. 18
They tested God I in their heart by demanding the I food they craved. 19 They spoke against God, I saying, Can God spread a
table in the I wilderness? 20 He struck the rock so that water gushed out and streams I overflowed. Can he also give bread or
provide meat for his I people? 21 Therefore, when the Lord heard, he was full of wrath a fire was kindled against I Jacob his
anger rose against I Israel, A9S Reading the Psalms with Luther 22 because they did not be-1 lieve in God and did not trust his I
saving power. 23 Yet he commanded the I skies above and opened the doors of I heaven, 24 and he rained down on them
man-1 na to eat and gave them the grain of I heaven. PRAYER Heavenly Dove, Spirit Divine, fill our hearts with the love of Your
Word, and through it create in us the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. Endow all parents with wisdom to rear their children in
the fear of God, and bless all our Christian schools, that these folds for Jesus lambs may prosper and multiply in our land.
Amen. 25 Man ate of the bread of the I angels he sent them food in a-1 bundance. 26 He caused the east wind to blow in the I
heavens, and by his power he led out the I south wind 27 he rained meat on I them like dust, winged birds like the sand I of the
seas 28 he let them fall in the midst I of their camp, all around their I dwellings. 29 And they ate and were I well filled, for he gave
them I what they craved. 30 But before they had satisfied their I craving, while the food was still I in their mouths, 31 the anger of
God rose against them, and he killed the strong-1 est of them and laid low the young men of I Israel. 32 In spite of all this, I they
still sinned despite his wonders, they did I not believe. S&6 Psalm 78 33 So he made their days vanish I like a breath, and their
years in I terror. 34 When he killed them, they I sought him they repented and sought God I earnestly. 35 They remembered that
God I was their rock, the Most High God their re-1 deemer. 36 But they flattered him I with their mouths they lied to him I with
their tongues. 37 Their heart was not steadfast I toward him they were not faithful to his I covenant. 38 Yet he, being compassio
nate, atoned for their iniquity and did not de-1 stroy them he restrained his anger often and did not stir up I all his wrath. 39 He
remembered that they I were but flesh, a wind that passes and comes I not again. 40 How often they rebelled against him in the
I wilderness and grieved him in the I desert! 41 They tested God again I and again and provoked the Holy One of I Israel. 42
They did not remem-1 ber his power or the day when he redeemed them I from the foe, 43 when he performed his signs in I
Egypt and his marvels in the I fields of Zoan. 44 He turned their riv-1 ers to blood, so that they could not drink I of their streams.
45 He sent among them swarms of flies, which de-1 voured them, and frogs, which de-1 stroyed them. 46 He gave their crops to
the destroying I locust and the fruit of their labor to the I locust. Reading the Psalms with Luther 47 He destroyed their I vines
with hail and their syca-1 mores with frost. 48 He gave over their cattle I to the hail and their flocks to I thunderbolts. 49 He let
loose on them his burning anger, wrath, indignation, I and distress, a company of destroying I angels. 50 He made a path for his
I anger he did not spare them from death, but gave their lives over I to the plague. 51 He struck down every firstborn in I Egypt,
the firstfruits of their strength in the I tents of Ham. 52 Then he led out his people I like sheep and guided them in the wilderness
I like a flock. PRAYER Our Father in heaven, You are a Father indeed, merciful, good, and kind. Teach us to know and to
acknowledge You as the Giver of every good gift. Do not deal with us after our ingratitude and apathy, but chasten us with
measure, so as to keep us in the way everlasting. Amen. 53 He led them in safety, so that they were 1 not afraid, but the sea
overwhelmed their I enemies. 54 And he brought them to his I holy land, to the mountain which his right I hand had won. 55 He
drove out nations be-1 fore them he apportioned them for a possession and settled the tribes of Israel I in their tents. 56 Yet they
tested and rebelled against the I Most High God and did not keep his testi-1 monies. /&? Psalm 78 57 but turned away and
acted treacherously like their I fathers they twisted like a de-1 ceitful bow. 5 For they provoked him to anger with their high I
places they moved him to jealousy with their I idols. 59 When God heard, he was I full of wrath, and he utterly rejected I Israel.
60 He forsook his dwelling at 1 Shiloh, the lent where he dwelt a-1 mong mankind, 61 and delivered his power to cap-1 tivity, his
glory to the hand I of the foe. 62 He gave his people over! to the sword and vented his wrath on his I heritage. 63 Fire devoured
their I young men, and their young women had no ! marriage song. 64 Their priests fell I by the sword, and their widows made
no lamen-1 tation. 65 Then the Lord awoke I as from sleep, like a strong man shouting be-1 cause of wine. 66 And he put his
adversaries I to rout he put them to ever-1 lasting shame. 67 He rejected the tent of I Joseph he did not choose the tribe of I
Ephraim, 68 but he chose the tribe of I Judah, Mount Zion, I which he loves. 69 He built his sanctuary like the high I heavens,
like the earth, which he has founded for-1 ever. 70 He chose David his servant and took him from the I sheepfolds 71 from
following the nursing ewes he brought him to shepherd Jacob his people, Israel his in-1 heritance. Reading the Psalms with
Luther 72 With upright heart he shep-1 herded them and guided them with his I skillful hand. PRAYER Thanks be to You, O
Lord, for Your manifold blessings in temporal and spiritual things. Punish us not as we deserve, but chasten us with the rod of a
father, and remember that Your Son, Jesus Christ, did endure the punishment due to our transgressions. For His sake blot out
our iniquities, and account them to us no more, but grant our eyes to see Your salvation. Amen. PSALM 79 r he 79th psalm is a
psalm of prayer against the destruction to come, which was accomplished by the Babylonians and by Antiochus Ephiphanes. It
is like the 78th psalm, so the same summary applies. Isaiah 63 also prays concerning this coming destruction. 79 1 O God, the
nations have come into your inheritance they have defiled your holy I temple they have laid Jerusalem in I ruins. 2 They have
given the bodies of your servants to the birds of the heav-1 ens for food, the flesh of your faithful to the beasts I of the earth. 3
They have poured out their blood like water all around Je-1 rusalem, and there was no one to I bury them. /90 Psalm 79 4 We
have become a taunt to our I neighbors, mocked and derided by those a-1 round us. 5 How long, O Lord? Will you be angry
for-1 ever? Will your jealousy I bum like fire? 6 Pour out your anger on the nations that do not I know you, and on the kingdoms
that do not call up-1 on your name! 7 For they have devoured I Jacob and laid waste his habi-1 tation. 8 Do not remember
against us our former in-1 iquities let your compassion come speedily to meet us, for we are brought I very low.  9 Help us, O
God of our salvation, for the glory I of your name deliver us, and atone for our sins, for your I names sake!  Why should the
nations say, Where I is their God? Let the avenging of the outpoured blood of your servants be known among the nations be-1
fore our eyes! 11 Let the groans of the prisoners come be-1 fore you according to your great power, preserve those I doomed to
die! 12 Return sevenfold into the lap of our I neighbors the taunts with which they have taunted you, I O Lord! 13 But we your
people, the sheep of your pasture, will give thanks to you for-1 ever from generation to generation we will re-1 count your praise.
Reading the Psalms with Luther PRAYER Lord Jesus Christ, with us abide. For round us falls the eventide. O let Your Word,
that saving light. Shine forth undimmed into the night. In these last days of great distress Grant us, dear Lord, true steadfastness
That we keep pure till life is spent Your holy Word and sacrament. Amen, lsbsha.d r 80th psalm is a psalm of prayer against the
constant enemies, the neighboring people, the Philistines, Syrians, Moabites, and Edomites, who surrounded the peo ple of
Israel, pestering and attacking them. So now also we pray against our enemies and neighbors, the rebellious spir its, and the
spiritual fathers and order, as we have prayed in times past against the heretics of the Church. 90 1 Give ear, O Shepherd of
Israel, you who lead Joseph I like a flock! You who are enthroned upon the cherubim, I shine forth. 2 Before Ephraim and
Benjamin and Ma-1 nasseh, stir up your might and come to I save us! 3 Restore us, I O God let your face shine, that we I may
be saved! /SSL? Psalm 80  O Lord I God of hosts, how long will you be angry with your I peoples prayers? 5 You have fed them
with the I bread of tears and given them tears to drink in full I measure. 6 You make us an object of contention for our I
neighbors, and our enemies laugh a-1 mong themselves. 7 Restore us, O I God of hosts let your face shine, that we I may be
saved! 8 You brought a vine out of I Egypt you drove out the nations and I planted it. 9 You cleared the I ground for it it took
deep root and I filled the land. 10 The mountains were covered I with its shade, the mighty cedars with its I branches. 11 It sent
out its branches I to the sea and its shoots to the I River. 12 Why then have you broken I down its walls, so that all who pass
along the way I pluck its fruit? 13 The boar from the forest rav-1 ages it, and all that move in the field I feed on it. 14 Turn again,
O I God of hosts! Look down from I heaven, and see have regard for this vine, 15 the stock that your right hand I planted, and for
the son whom you made strong I for yourself. 16 They have burned it with fire they have I cut it down may they perish at the
rebuke 1 of your face! 17 But let your hand be on the man of your I right hand, the son of man whom you have made strong I for
yourself! /9S Reading the Psalms with Luther ,8 Then we shall nol turn I back from you give us life, and we will call up- 1 on your
name! 19 Restore us, O Lord I God of hosts! let your face shine, that we I may be saved! PRAYER Blessed be Your holy name,
O Lord God of heaven, because You have planted in our land that noble vine, the Christian Church. Cause it to grow and to
spread forth its branches, that it may overshadow the land and bring forth prolific fruit for the good of our nation, and the
salvation of many, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.  - r  Xhe 81st psalm is a psalm of prayer. It is a song sung and
preached in the harvest season at the Festival of Tabernacles, calling the people back to the First Com mandment, that they
should have only one GodHe who had brought them out of the land of Egyptand should praise and call on no other. They did not
keep this com mand, but instead their mouth and instruction were full of PSALM 81 idolatry, whereas they ought to have been
full of the true God and should have always spoken of Him alone. This psalm teaches us to believe in Christ and cling to Him
alone and never commend any work as righteous before God. We also should have our mouth full of Christ, yet we do not do
this. Each one follows his own self-conceit and idol. /94 Psalm 81 9 / 1 Sing aloud to I God our strength shout for joy to the God
of I Jacob! 2 Raise a song sound the I tambourine, the sweet lyre l with the harp. 3 Blow the trumpet at the I new moon, at the
full moon, on our I feast day. 4 For it is a statute for I Israel, a just decree of the God of I Jacob. 5 He made it a decree in Joseph
when he went out over the land of I Egypt. I hear a language I I had not known: 6 1 relieved your shoulder of the I burden your
hands were freed from the I basket. 7 In distress you called, and I de- I livered you I answered you in the secret place of thunder
I tested you at the waters of I Meribah. 8 Hear, O my people, while I ad- I monish you! O Israel, if you would but lis- I ten to me! 9
There shall be no strange god a- I mong you you shall not bow down to a I foreign god. 10 I am the Lord your God, who brought
you up out of the land of I Egypt.  Open your mouth wide, and I will I fill it. 11 "But my people did not listen I to my voice Israel
would not sub- I mit to me. 12 So I gave them over to their I stubborn hearts, to follow their own I counsels. 13 Oh, that my
people would lis- I ten to me, that Israel would walk I in my ways! Reading the Psalms with Luther 14 1 would soon subdue their
I enemies and turn my hand a-1 gainst their foes. 15 Those who hate the Lord would I cringe toward him, and their fate would
last for-1 ever. 16 But he would feed you with the finest I of the wheat, and with honey from the rock I would sat-1 isfy you. PR
AYER O Lord, God of all grace, anoint us with the oil of joy, causing Your Holy Spirit to dwell in our hearts, that He may teach us
to worship You in spirit and in truth. And whenever we enter Your courts, let it be done with a joyous heart, to give glory to You,
and to praise Your holy name, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen. PSALM 82 r  /ne 82nd psalm is a psalm of comfort against
the tyrants who oppress those in misery. But this psalm has already had its interpretation, which has long been published. From
Luthers commentary on Psalm 82:2: After the Gospel or the ministry, there is on earth no belter jewel, no greater treasure, nor
richer alms, no fairer endowment, no finer possession than a ruler who makes and preserves just laws. Such men are rightly
called gods.... But worldly government will make no progress. The people are too wicked, and the lords dishonor Gods name /96
Psalm 82 and Word continually by the shameful abuse of their god head. Therefore, he prays for another government and king
dom in which things will be better, where Gods name will be honored, His Word kept and He Himself be served that is the
kingdom of Christ. . . . For Christ practices aright the three divine virtues.... He advances Gods Word and the preachers of it He
makes and keeps law for the poor He protects and rescues the miser able. The service of God in Christendom is justice, peace,
righteousness, life, salvation. Of this kingdom of Christ the Gospels, and the Epistles of the apostles, preach and testify. Luther s
Wurk. U 54. 72 1 1 God has taken his place in the divine I council in the midst of the gods he holds I judgment: 2 How long will
you judge un- I justly and show partiality to the I wicked? 3 Give justice to the weak and the I fatherless maintain the right of the
afflicted and the I destitute. 4 Rescue the weak and the I needy deliver them from the hand of the I wicked " 5 They have neither
knowledge nor understanding, they walk about in I darkness all the foundations of the earth are I shaken. 6 I said, I You are
gods. sons of the Most High, I all of you 7 nevertheless, like men I you shall die, and fall like I any prince." 8 Arise, O God, I
judge the earth for you shall inherit all the I nations! /97 Reading the Psalms with Luther PRA YER Thanks be to You, Ruler of
nations, because You have granted our native land free institutions of government, under which we enjoy both civil and religious
liberty. By Your mighty hand protect the government of this free repub lic, and suffer it not to be overthrown by revolutions and
civil wars and always grant us honest and wise men for offices high and low. Amen. PSALM 83 he 83rd psalm is a psalm of
prayer. It is much the same as Psalm 80, which clearly spells out the names of the Gentile nations therefore, the same summary
applies. 93 ' O God, do not keep I silence do not hold your peace or be still, I O God! 2 For behold, your enemies make an I
uproar  those who hate you have I raised their heads. 3 They lay crafty plans against your I people they consult together against
your I treasured ones. 4 They say, Come, let us wipe them out as a I nation let the name of Israel be remembered I no more! 5
For they conspire with 1 one accord against you they make a I covenant 6 the tents of Edom and the I Ishmaelites Moab and the
I Hagrites, 7 Gebal and Ammon and I Amalek, Phiiistia with the inhabi-1 tants of Tyre /99 Psalm 83 8 Asshur also has I joined
them they are the strong arm of the chil-1 dren of Lot. 9 Do to them as you did to I Midian as to Sisera and Jabin at the river I
Kishon, 10 who were destroyed at I Endor who became dung I for the ground. 11 Make their nobles like Or-1 eb and Zeeb  all
their princes like Zebah and I Zalmunna, 12 who said, Let us take possession I for ourselves of the pastures I of God. , Omy
God, make them like I whirling dust, like chaff be-1 fore the wind. A As fire consumes the I forest  as the flame sets the moun-1
tains ablaze, 15 so may you pursue them with your I tempest and terrify them with your I hurricane! 16 Fill their fac-1 es with
shame that they may seek your name, I O Lord. 17 Let them be put to shame and dismayed for-1 ever let them perish I in
disgrace, 18 that they may know that you alone, whose name I is the Lord, are the Most High over I all the earth. PRAYER How
often, O Lord of hosts, have You protected Your Church and put her enemies to shame. Grant us unflinching faith to abide in
Your Word that we yield not one jot or tittle of Your truth to please men. Continue to be our defense, expose the snares which
the hypocrites artfully lay for Your people, hinder the plans of Your enemies, and show Yourself Lord over all, as You have done
so many times of old. Amen. /99 Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 84 r  /z 84th psalm is a psalm of comfort. It praises
Gods Word highly over all things and exhorts us to gladly give up all good thingsglory, power, joy, and whatever we desirethat
we may hold onto Gods Word. And if we should be like the doorkeeper, that is, the least of those in the temple, this would still be
far better than to sit in all the castles of the godless. For Gods Word (the psalmist says) gives victory, salvation, grace, glory, and
all good things. Oh, how blessed are those who believe this and then keep it! But where are they? Even if they were slandered
and despised, they would Find the whole world to be theirs in abundance, prepared for them. c 94 1 How lovely is your I dwelling
place, O I Lord of hosts! 2 My soul longs, yes, faints for the courts I of the Lord my heart and flesh sing for joy to the I living God.
3 Even the sparrow Finds a home, and the swallow a nest for herself, where she may I lay her young, at your altars, O Lord of
hosts, my King I and my God. 4 Blessed are those who dwell I in your house, ever sing-1 ing your praise! 5 Blessed are those
whose strength is I in you, in whose heart are the highways to I Zion. 6 As they go through the Valley of Baca they make it a I
place of springs the early rain also covers I it with pools. 00 Psalm 84 7 They go from I strength to strength each one appears
before God in I Zion. 8 O Lord God of hosts, I hear my prayer give ear, O God of I Jacob! 9 Behold our shield, I O God look on
the face of your a-1 nointed! 10 For a day in your courts is better than a thousand I elsewhere. I would rather be a doorkeeper in
the house of my God than dwell in the tents of I wickedness. 11 For the Lord God is a sun and shield the Lord bestows favor and
I honor. No good thing does he withhold from those who walk up- I rightly. 12 O I Lord of hosts, blessed is the one who I trusts in
you! PRAYER Praise and thanks to You, Lord, our God, because You have granted us Your Word which shows us the way of
sal vation. By Your Holy Spirit work effectually in us through this Your Word, that it may prove in us a living and fruitful seed
bringing a hundredfold, and that the fruit remain to eternal life. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther r 85th psalm is a psalm of
prayer in which the psalmist pleads against Gods wrath and seeks His grace. The wrath (in my opinion) consists in this, that they
have a lack of Gods Word and true preaching also a lack of good government, peace, and godly authority and finally a lack of
fruitful times and good harvest. These afflictions hang together, one with the other. Therefore, the psalmist prays that God would
speak again, so that His people will not fall into folly, blaspheme in impatience, nor seek other gods so that peace, unity, truth,
and love might wash over His peo ple, and that the land be fruitful so that they can live a prop er and honorable life in a
God-pleasing way in peace and quietness, as St. Paul (1 Timothy 2:2) also teaches us to pray. 1 Lord, you were favorable I to
your land you restored the fortunes of I Jacob. 2 You forgave the iniquity of your I people you covered I all their sin. 3 You
withdrew I all your wrath you turned from your hot I anger. 4 Restore us again, O God of our sal-1 vation, and put away your
indignation I toward us! 5 Will you be angry with us for-1 ever? Will you prolong your anger to all gener-1 ations? 6 Will you not
revive I us again that your people may re-1 joice in you? 7 Show us your steadfast love, I O Lord, and grant us your sal-1 vation.
Psalm 85 8 Let me hear what God the I Lord will speak, for he will speak peace to his people, to his saints but let them not turn
back to I folly. 9 Surely his salvation is near to those who I fear him  that glory may dwell I in our land. 10 Steadfast love and
faith-1 fulness meet righteousness and peace kiss each I other. 11 Faithfulness springs up I from the ground and righteousness
looks down I from the sky. 12 Yes, the Lord will give I what is good, and our land will yield its I increase. 13 Righteousness will
go be-1 fore him and make his foot-1 steps a way. PRAYER Remember not, O God, our transgressions against us, and record
not our sins in Your book, but cast them into the depth of the sea, and remember them no more forever. Impute to us the
obedience of Your Son, Jesus Christ, who fulfilled all righteousness for us and gave Himself a sacrifice for our sins. Let us live
for His sake, and enable us to walk worthy of our calling. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther or PSALM 86 r 86th psalm is a
psalm of prayer. The title itself calls it A Prayer of David. It is easy and clear to under stand. In his distress, David calls on his
God against his enemies who seek to put him to death, whether that be Saul, Absalom, or whoever. But notice how richly and
masterful ly David praises God for His goodness, faithfulness, and power, so that he may truly excite his own faith and bring
warmth to his prayer, as we should do also. The sign he desires is that God would finally help him so that it would be said: God
has helped him and taken his side against the rage of his enemies, who have violated Gods rule. e 96 1 Incline your ear, O Lord,
and I answer me, for I am poor and I needy. 2 Preserve my life, for I am I godly save your servant, who trusts in you you I are
my God. 3 Be gracious to me, I O Lord, for to you do I cry I all the day. 4 Gladden the soul of your I servant, for to you, O Lord,
do I lift I up my soul. 5 For you, O Lord, are good and for- I giving, abounding in steadfast love to all who call up- I on you. 6 Give
ear, O Lord, I to my prayer listen to my I plea for grace. 04 Psalm 86 7 In the day of my trouble I call up-1 on you, for you I
answer me. 8 There is none like you among the gods, I O Lord, nor are there any I works like yours. 9 All the nations you have
made shall come and worship before you, I O Lord, and shall glori-1 fy your name. 10 For you are great and do I wondrous
things you a-1 lone are God. 11 Teach me your way, O Lord, that I may walk I in your truth unite my heart to I fear your name.
12 I give thanks to you, O Lord my God, with I my whole heart, and I will glorify your name for-1 ever. 13 For great is your
steadfast I love toward me you have delivered my soul from the depths I of Sheol. u O God, insolent men have risen up against
me a band of ruthless men I seek my life, and they do not set you be-1 fore them. 15 But you, O Lord, are a God merciful and I
gracious, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love and I faithfulness. 16 Turn to me and be gra-1 cious to me give your
strength to your servant, and save the son of your maid-1 servant. 17 Show me a sign of your I favor, that those who hate me
may see and be put to shame because you, Lord, have helped me and com-1 forted me. Reading the Psalms with Luther PR A
YER O Lord Almighty, You alone are God, and besides You there is none other. Heaven is Your throne and the earth Your
footstool. But seated high You look upon the poor and lowly. Remember that we are dust and without You can do nothing, and
be Yourself the help of our countenance. Remove our sins from us, and save us from the hand of our enemies, through Jesus
Christ, our Lord. Amen. PSALM 87 le 87th psalm is a prophecy of the Holy Christian Church, that it shall be a city as wide as the
earth is, and in it shall be bom Ethiopians, Egyptians, Babylonians, Philistines, residents of Tyre, and peoples of other lands and
tongues. This shall all happen through the Gospel, which shall preach marvelous things of God, namely, the knowl edge of God,
how one may come to God, be freed from sin, and be saved from death, through Christ. And the worship of God in this city shall
also be singing and dancing, that is, they will proclaim, praise, and thank Gods grace with joy. In that city, no Moses shall plague
and torment us with his Law. S? 1 On the holy mount stands the city he I founded 2 the Lord loves the gates of Zion more than
all the dwelling places of I Jacob. 3 Glorious things of you are I spoken, O city I of God. 206 Psalm 88 4 Among those who know
me I mention Rahab and I Babylon behold, Philistia and Tyre, with Cush This one was bom I there, they say. 5 And of Zion it
shall be said, This one and that one were I bom in her for the Most High himself will es- I tablish her. 6 The Lord records as he
registers the I peoples, This one was I bom there  7 Singers and dancers a- I like say, "All my springs I are in you  PRAYER
Thanks be to You, our heavenly Father, because You have called us into the Church of Your Son, Jesus Christ, and have
begotten us again unto a lively hope through the Gospel. Keep us steadfast in the faith, that we may remain living stones in this
Your spiritual temple to our last day, and cause us always to rejoice over Your salvation. Amen. PSALM 88 ie 88th psalm is a
psalm of prayer that prays in the person of Christ and all other great saints, lamenting the high spiritual suffering that is above all
suffering, namely, the terror of God. This is what the psalmist calls death, the grave, and hell, as it truly is, causing miserable
and pitiful conditions. St. Paul called it the messenger of Satan (2 Corinthians 12:7) that beat on him with his fist, and a "thorn in
his body with which he was pierced (as in Greece they speared an evildoer). In like manner, the heathen slan- 07 READING
THE PSALMS WITH LUTHER der our Lord and call Him the pierced one, while the Jews call Him the one who was hung. It is
the inheritance of Christ and His people to receive this ridicule and to suffer in the world. This psalm also says that their friends
and rel atives, who should cry for them and suffer with them, are instead far from them.  9  1 O Lord, God of my sal-1 vation I cry
out day and night be-1 fore you. 2 Let my prayer come be-1 fore you incline your ear I to my cry! 3 For my soul is full of I
troubles, and my life draws near I to Sheol. 1 am counted among those who go down I to the pit I am a man who I has no
strength, s like one set loose among the dead, like the slain that lie I in the grave, like those whom you remember no more, for
they are cut off I from your hand. 6 You have put me in the depths I of the pit, in the regions I dark and deep. 7 Your wrath lies
heavy up-1 on me. and you overwhelm me with I all your waves. 8 You have caused my companions to I shun me you have
made me a hor-1 ror to them. I am shut in so that 1 cannot escape 9 my eye grows dim through I sorrow. Every day I call upon
you, O Lord I spread out my I hands to you. Psalm 88 10 Do you work wonders I for the dead? Do the departed rise up to I
praise you? 11 Is your steadfast love declared I in the grave/ or your faithfulness in I Abaddon? 12 Are your wonders known in
the I darkness, or your righteousness in the land of for- I getfulness? 13 But I, O Lord, I cry to you in the morning my prayer
comes be- I fore you. 14 O Lord, why do you cast my I soul away? Why do you hide your I face from me? 15 Afflicted and close
to death from my I youth up, I suffer your terrors I am I helpless. 16 Your wrath has swept I over me your dreadful assaults de- I
stroy me. 17 They surround me like a flood I all day long they close in on me to- I gether. 18 You have caused my beloved and
my friend to I shun me my companions have become I darkness. PRAYER Lord Jesus, who endured the pangs of death and the
tor ments of hell for our sakes, be with us and save us from the spirit of despondency which would drive us to despair, and
would swallow up our soul. Pour out abundantly upon us the Spirit of joy and comfort, to lift from us the burden and guilt of sin,
and to strengthen and comfort us through Your sacred wounds. Amen. 09 Reading the Psalms with Luther d'ne 89th psalm is a
prophecy of Christ and His kingdom. The psalmist calls it a heavenly kingdom (as Christ Himself does in the Gospel). It takes up
the prophe cy of Christ given to David and emphasizes it with an abun dant spirit. Particularly, the psalmist emphasizes that this
kingdom shall never, for the sake of any sin, come to an end or be left behind. Accordingly, our salvation shall not be based on
our piety, though the promised kingdom of the Jews and all other earthly kingdoms last no longer or stretch no farther than they
are pious. But later the psalmist begins to prophesy that such a precious and fruitful kingdom would be trampled, tom, and
subverted by the Antichrist, so that it appears as though God has forgotten His former abundant promises and is doing the
opposite of His own words. But this all is announced beforehand, to be a comfort to us in these last days. Therefore, we should
not despair, though it seems to us that there is no Christendom, no light of the Church, anymore on earth. Yet it always remains,
however distressed, broken, and persecuted. 99 1 I will sing of the steadfast love of the Lord, for-1 ever with my mouth I will
make known your faithfulness to all gener-1 ations. 2 For I said, Steadfast love will be built up for-1 ever in the heavens you will
establish your I faithfulness. 3 You have said, 1 have made a covenant with my I chosen one I have sworn to David my I
servant: Psalm 89 4 I will establish your offspring for-1 ever, and build your throne for all gener-1 ations.  5 Let the heavens
praise your wonders, I O Lord, your faithfulness in the assembly of the I holy ones! 6 For who in the skies can be compared I to
the Lord? Who among the heavenly beings is I like the Lord, 7 a God greatly to be feared in the council of the I holy ones, and
awesome above all who are a-1 round him? 8 O Lord God of hosts, who is mighty as you are, I O Lord  with your faithfulness all
a-1 round you? 9 You rule the raging I of the sea when its waves rise, you I still them. 10 You crushed Rahab like a I carcass
you scattered your enemies with your I mighty arm. 11 The heavens are yours the earth al-1 so is yours the world and all that is
in it, you have I founded them. 12 The north and the south, you have ere-1 ated them Tabor and Hermon joyously I praise your
name. 13 You have a I mighty arm strong is your hand, high your I right hand. 14 Righteousness and justice are the foundation I
of your throne steadfast love and faithfulness go be-1 fore you. 15 Blessed are the people who know the I festal shout, who
walk, O Lord, in the light I of your face, 16 who exult in your name I all the day and in your righteousness are ex-1 alted. 17 For
you are the glory I of their strength by your favor our hom is ex-1 alted. // Reading the Psalms with Luther 18 For our shield
belongs I to the Lord, our king to the Holy One of I Israel. PRAYER Lord Jesus, we thank You for calling us by Your Gospel into
Your kingdom of grace. Grant that we be members not of Your visible Church only, but of the invisible community of saints, living
temples of Your Spirit. Keep us steadfast in the true faith, and finally receive us into Your kingdom of eternal glory. Amen. 19 Of
old you spoke in a vision to your godly one, and said: I have granted help to one who is I mighty I have exalted one chosen from
the I people. 20 I have found David, my I servant with my holy oil I have a-1 nointed him, 21 so that my hand shall be estab- I
lished with him my arm also shall I strengthen him. 22 The enemy shall not out-1 wit him the wicked shall not I humble him. 23 1
will crush his foes be-1 fore him and strike down those who I hate him. 24 My faithfulness and my steadfast love shall I be with
him, and in my name shall his horn be ex- I alted. 25 1 will set his hand I on the sea and his right hand on the I rivers. 26 He
shall cry to me, You are my 1 Father, my God, and the Rock of my sal-1 vation. 27 And I will make him the I firstborn, the
highest of the kings I of the earth. Psalm 89 2  My steadfast love I will keep for him for-1 ever, and my covenant will stand I firm
for him. 29 I will establish his offspring for-1 ever and his throne as the days of the I heavens. 30 If his children for-1 sake my law
and do not walk according to my I just decrees, 31 if they violate my I statutes and do not keep my com-1 mandments, 32 then I
will punish their transgression I with the rod and their iniqui-1 ty with stripes, 33 but I will not remove from him my 1 steadfast
love or be false to my I faithfulness. 3  I will not violate my I covenant or alter the word that went forth I from my lips. 35 Once for
all I have sworn by my 1 holiness I will not lie to I David. 36 His offspring shall endure for-1 ever, his throne as long as the sun
be-1 fore me. 37 Like the moon it shall be established for-1 ever, a faithful witness I in the skies. PRAYER We glorify You, O
God, our most merciful Father in heaven, because You have given us a Savior of whom we know that He is able to save even
the greatest of sinners, and because in Him You have made a covenant that shall endure forever. Because You have so
graciously received us into the covenant in Holy Baptism, grant us also grace to walk therein, and to reach the end of faith, the
salvation of the soul. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther 38 But now you have cast off and re-1 jected you are full of wrath
against your a-1 nointed. 39 You have renounced the covenant with your I servant you have defiled his crown I in the dust. 40
You have breached I all his walls you have laid his strongholds in I mins. 41 All who pass by I plunder him he has become the
scom of his I neighbors. 42 You have exalted the right hand I of his foes you have made all his ene-1 mies rejoice. 43 You have
also turned back the edge I of his sword, and you have not made him stand in I battle. 44 You have made his splen-1 dor to
cease and cast his throne I to the ground. 45 You have cut short the days I of his youth you have covered I him with shame. 46
How long, O Lord? Will you hide yourself for-1 ever? How long will your wrath I bum like fire? 47 Remember how short my I time
is! For what vanity you have created all the chil-1 dren of man! 48 What man can live and never I see death? Who can deliver
his soul from the power I of Sheol? 49 Lord, where is your steadfast I love of old, which by your faithfulness you swore to I
David? 50 Remember, O Lord, how your ser-1 vants are mocked, and how I bear in my heart the insults of all the many I
nations, 51 with which your enemies mock, I O Lord, with which they mock the footsteps of your a-1 nointed. Psalm 90 52
Blessed be the Lord for-1 ever! Amen and I Amen. PRAYER Wonderfully have You, O God, preserved Your Church throughout
the ages according to Your promise that the gates of hell should not prevail against it. In many and mighty conflicts against
many and mighty enemies You have been the salvation of Your own people. Grant us faith to trust Your promises, and let us not
fall from You for any earthly afflic tion or in the pains of death, for Jesus Christs sake. Amen. r 90th psalm is a psalm of instructio
n in which Moses teaches the origin of death, namely sin, which, though known only by God and hidden from the world, is yet
inborn in all from Adam to us. It shows that life here is not only short but also miserable, so that it may well be called a daily
death. Nevertheless, the psalmist says that such a life is good, so that through it we would be driven to see Gods grace and His
help to deliver us from it all. For those who never think of death and feel no misery remain senseless fools, caring nothing for
Gods grace or help. The psalm ends with the prayer that God would show us His work, namely His deliverance from sin and
death, that is, that He would send Christ. And the psalmist asks that, while we live here, God would establish our work, that is,
that both spiritual and worldly authority may be and remain favorable. The 90th psalm is a short, fine, rich, and full lit tle prayer.
Reading the Psai.ms with Luther 90 1 Lord, you have been our I dwelling place" in all gener-1 ations. 2 Before the mountains
were brought forth, or ever had formed the earth I and the world, from everlasting to everlasting I you are God. 3 You return I
man to dust" and say, Return, O chil-1 dren of man!" 4 For a thousand years in your sight are but as yesterday when ! it is past,"
or as a watch I in the night. 5 You sweep them away as I with a flood' they are like a dream, like grass that is renewed in the I
morning: 6 in the morning it flourishes and I is renewed in the evening it fades and I withers. 7 For we are brought to an end by
your I anger by your wrath we I are dismayed. 8 You have set our iniquities be-1 fore you, our secret sins in the light of your I
presence. 9 For all our days pass away un-1 der your wrath we bring our years to an end I like a sigh. ,0 The years of our life are
seventy, or even by reason of strength I eighty yet their span is but toil and trouble they are soon gone, and we I fly away. 11
Who considers the power of your I anger, and your wrath according to the I fear of you? 12 So teach us to number I our days
that we may get a heart of I wisdom. 13 Return, O Lord! I How long? Have pity on your I servants!  2/6 Psalm 91  Satisfy us in
the morning with your I steadfast love, that we may rejoice and be glad I all our days. 15 Make us glad for as many days as you
have af-1 flicted us. and for as many years as we have seen I evil. 16 Let your work be shown to your I servants, and your
glonous power to their I children. 17 Let the favor of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish the work of our hands up-1 on
us H yes, establish the work I of our hands! PRAYER O Lord, eternal God, teach us so to number our days that we may apply
our hearts to wisdom, embracing Christ and His Gospel as Your wisdom and Your counsel for our salva tion. Grant us grace to
walk honestly as in the day that, when our last hour is come, we may be found in true faith and god liness, ready to appear
before the judgment seat of Christ. Amen. PSALM 91 r he 91st psalm is a psalm of comfort that exhorts us to trust in God in all
distress and affliction. It is full of abundant promises flowing from and spun from the First Commandment. It is the second psalm
in which the dear angels are proclaimed to be our guards and protectors (cf. Psalm 34), which is comforting and good to
remember. Reading the Psalms with Luther 9 / 1 He who dwells in the shelter of the I Most High will abide in the shadow of the
Al-1 mighty. 2 1 will say to the Lord, My refuge and my I fortress, my God, in I whom I trust. 3 For he will deliver you from the
snare of the I fowler and from the deadly I pestilence. 4 He will cover you with his pinions, and under his wings you will find I
refuge his faithfulness is a shield and I buckler. 5 You will not fear the terror I of the night, nor the arrow that I flies by day, 6 nor
the pestilence that stalks in I darkness, nor the destruction that wastes at I noonday. 7 A thousand may fall at your side, ten
thousand at your i right hand, but it will not come I near you. 8 You will only look I with your eyes and see the recompense of the
I wicked. 9 Because you have made the Lord your I dwelling place the Most High, who is my I refuge 10 no evil shall be allowed
to be-1 fall you, no plague come I near your tent. 11 For he will command his angels con-1 ceming you to guard you in I all your
ways. Psalm 91 12 On their hands they will I bear you up, lest you strike your foot a-1 gainst a stone. 13 You will tread on the
lion and the I adder the young lion and the serpent you will trample I underfoot. i Because he holds fast to me in love, 1 will de-1
liver him 1 will protect him, because he I knows my name. i3 When he calls to me, I will answer him 1 will be with him in I trouble
I will rescue him and I honor him. i With long life I will sat-1 isfy him and show him my sal-1 vation. PRAYER Lord Jesus Christ,
the Author and Finisher of faith, grant us the true and saving faith, and preserve us in the same against all temptations to doubt
and unbelief. Blot out our iniquities by Your blood cover our sins with Your righteous ness, and let Your angels be a fenced wall
around us against all our enemies, and evermore teach us to know the secret of Your Fathers will. Amen. /9 Reading the Psalms
with Luther Che 92nd psalm is a psalm of comfort that extols God s Word as the most highly exalted and precious gift against
the false saints, whom it attacks. They certainly flower for a lime, glorious and powerful, but finally they perish. However, the
righteous will remain forever. Although they come to an old age, they shall yet never be old, but they become young daily
through Gods Word, which always conveys fruit and new growth. But fools nei ther consider nor understand these things, as we
also see today in our own time. A? 1 It is good to give thanks I to the Lord, to sing praises to your name, I O Most High 2 to
declare your steadfast love in the I morning, and your faithful-1 ness by night, 3 to the music of the lute I and the harp, to the
melody I of the lyre. 4 For you, O Lord, have made me glad I by your work at the works of your hands 11 sing for joy. 5 How
great are your works, I O Lord! Your thoughts are I very deep! 6 The stupid man cannot know the fool cannot under-1 stand this:
7 that though the wicked sprout like grass and all evildoers flourish, they are doomed to destruction for-1 ever Psalm 92  but
you, IO Lord, are on high for- I ever. 9 For behold, your enemies, O Lord, for behold, your enemies shall I perish all evildoers
shall be I scattered. 10 But you have exalted my horn like that of the I wild ox you have poured over me I fresh oil. 11 My eyes
have seen the downfall of my I enemies my ears have heard the doom of my evil as-1 sailants. 12 The righteous flourish like the
I palm tree and grow like a cedar in I Lebanon. 13 They are planted in the house I of the Lord they flourish in the courts I of our
God. 14 They still bear fruit in I old age they are ever full of I sap and green, 15 to declare that the Lord is I upright he is my rock,
and there is no unrighteousness I in him. PRAYER Oh, that I had a thousand voices To praise my God with thousand tongues!
My heart, which in the Lord rejoices. Then would proclaim in grateful songs To all, wherever I might be. What great things God
has done for me. Amen. (LSB:1) Reading the Psalms with Luther r 93rd psalm is a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ, that it is
as wide as the world and remains forever. Although floods and waters storm against it, that is, the worlds death and rage oppose
and struggle against it, they accomplish nothing at all for He is greater than the world and its prince. This kingdom and all things
will be ordered through His Word, without sword or armor. He will adorn His house and make it holy. For the true worship that
adorns and illuminates this house is preaching, praise, and thanks giving, which belong to neither Moses nor the Old Testament.
93 1 The Lord reigns he is robed in I majesty the Lord is robed he has put on strength I as his belt. Yes, the world is es-1
tablished it shall nev-1 er be moved. 2 Your throne is established I from of old you are from ever-1 lasting. 3 The floods have
lifted up, O Lord, the floods have lifted I up their voice the floods lift up their I roaring. 4 Mightier than the thunders of many
waters, mightier than the waves I of the sea, the Lord on high is 1 mighty! 5 Your decrees are very I trustworthy holiness befits
your house, O Lord, for-1 evermore. Psalm 94 PR A YLR Lord Jesus, triumphant Victor and glorious King, contin ue to spread
Your kingdom on earth, converting the nations from the power of darkness unto Your light. Preserve Your Gospel in its truth and
purity to us and to our children in all generations. Grant us to worship You in righteousness and true holiness all our days, and
finally receive us into those glorious mansions that You have prepared in the house of Your Father. Amen. PSALM 94 he 94th
psalm is a psalm of prayer that, by my understanding, cries out not against the heathen but against the kings and princes,
priests, and prophets. The psaJmist calls them fools among the people, senseless ones who teach and rule the people foolishly
and badly. These are the ones who kill and persecute all the godly prophets and their disciples. As the psalmist says, they
presume upon God. He has given them the power and has stood by and watched, not paying attention to those whom they
slaughtered as con demned heretics and rebels. Against these authorities the psalmist prays, desiring help and support.
Although he finds no help, he takes comfort in his confidence that Gods Word and actions are reliable, and God will not allow the
corrupt throne to come upon them but will repay them for their lies and murders. Amen. Reading the Psaims vmth Luther 94 1 O
Lord, God of I vengeance, O God of vengeance, I shine forth! 2 Rise up, O judge I of the earth repay to the proud what I they
deserve!  O Lord, how long shall the I wicked, how long shall the wick- I ed exult? 4 They pour out their ar- I rogant words all the
evil- I doers boast. s They crush your people, I O Lord, and afflict your I heritage. 6 They kill the widow and the I sojourner, and
murder the I fatherless 7 and they say. The Lord I does not see the God of Jacob does I not perceive. 8 Understand. O dullest of
the I people! Fools, when will I you be wise? 9 He who planted the ear, does I he not hear? He who formed the eye, does I he
not see? 10 He who disciplines the nations, does he I not rebuke? He who teaches man I knowledge n the Lord knows the I
thoughts of man, that they are I but a breath. 12 Blessed is the man whom you discipline, I O Lord, and whom you teach out I of
your law, 13 to give him rest from days of I trouble, until a pit is dug for the I wicked. 14 For the Lord will not forsake his I people
he will not abandon his I heritage 15 for justice will return to the I righteous, and all the upright in heart will I follow it. 24 Psalm
94 Who rises up for me against the I wicked? Who stands up lor me against evil- I doers? 17 If the Lord had not I been my help,'
my soul would soon have lived in the land of I silence. t When 1 thought, My I foot slips, 5  your steadfast love, O Lord, I held me
up. ,9 When the cares of my heart are I many,' your consolations I cheer my soul. 20 Can wicked rulers be allied I with you/
those who frame injustice by I statute? 21 They band together against the life of the I righteous' and condemn the inno- I cent to
death. 22 But the Lord has become my I stronghold/ and my God the rock of my I refuge. 2 He will bring back on them their
iniquity and wipe them out for their I wickedness the Lord our God will I wipe them out. PRAYER Lord. You are a merciful and a
jealous God. Convert Your enemies, and draw to You those that are going astray but restrain the malicious persecutors of Your
Church and the willful corrupters of Your truth. Bring their counsels to naught, and show that You are the Lord. Build Your
Church, and make it a city upon a hill for the salvation of many, through Jesus Christ. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther
PSALM 95 C-/he 95th psalm is a prophecy of Christ the Letter to the Hebrews extensively treats it as a prophecy of the time of
the New Testament and of the voice of the Gospel. In short, the psalm teaches and calls us to Christ and to the Word of God, to
true worship. The psalmist warns us by the example of the faithless fathers in the wilderness, who also did not come into the
promised land on account of their unbelief and contempt for God. You must, however, apply the entire psalm to Christ: He is
Himself the God whom we are exhorted to worship. He has made us and is our shepherd, and we are His sheep. He is the one
who tested the unbelieving father, as Paul in 1 Corinthians 10:9 also states. From henceforth He will receive no Mosaic worship,
but instead faith, joyful preach ing, praise, and thanksgiving. 95 1 Oh come, let us sing I to the Lord let us make a joyful noise to
the rock of our sal-1 vation! 2 Let us come into his presence with thanks-1 giving let us make a joyful noise to him with I songs of
praise! 3 For the Lord is a I great God, and a great King a-1 bove all gods. 4 In his hand are the depths I of the earth the heights
of the mountains are his I also. 26 Psalm 95 5 The sea is his, for he I made it/ and his hands formed the I dry land. 6 Oh come,
let us worship and I bow down/ let us kneel before the Lord, our I Maker! 7 For he I is our God/ and we are the people of his
pasture, and the sheep I of his hand. Today, if you I hear his voice/ 8 do not harden your hearts, as at Meribah, as on the day at
Massah in the I wilderness, 9 when your fathers put me I to the lest " and put me to the proof, though they had I seen my work.
10 For forty years I loathed that generation and said, They are a people who go astray I in their heart/ and they have not I known
my ways. 11 Therefore I swore I in my wrath/ They shall not enter I my rest  PR A YHR Lord Jesus, leach us to profit by the
warning examples of others. So govern us that we do not harden our hearts, as did those at Meribah. Incline our hearts to Your
Gospel, and enable us by Your good Spirit to receive with meekness the engrafted Word that is able to save the soul. Suffer us
not, O Lord, to fall from You, neither in life nor in death. Amen. READING THE PSALMS WITH LUTHEK PSALM 96 r S he 96ih
psalm is a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ in the world, in which should be nothing but joy and praise. The text is, truly, itself
clear enough. In it, all the nations, lands, people, forests, seas, trees are called to wor ship. They should praise and thank the
Lord because He judges and rules with righteousness and truth. That is, He delivers us from sins and all that sin brings with it,
such as death, hell, the power of the devil, and all that is evil. This is the new song of the new kingdom from new creatures, from
a new people, not bom of the Law or works but bom of God and Spirit. These are nothing less than miracles, done in Christ
Jesus, our Lord. 96 ' Oh sing to the Lord a I new song sing to the Lord, I all the earth! 2 Sing to the Lord, I bless his name tell of
his salvation from I day to day. 3 Declare his glory among the I nations, his marvelous works among all the I peoples! 4 For great
is the Lord, and greatly I to be praised he is to be feared a-1 bove all gods. 5 For all the gods of the peoples are worthless I
idols, but the Lord made the I heavens. 6 Splendor and majesty are be-1 fore him strength and beauty are in his sanctu-1 ary. 7
Ascribe to the Lord, O families of the I peoples, ascribe to the Lord glo-1 ry and strength! Psalm 96  Ascribe lo the Lord the glory
I due his name bring an offering, and come in- I to his courts! 9 Worship the Lord in the splendor of I holiness tremble before
him, I all the earth! Say among the nations, The Lord reigns! Yes, the world is established it shall nev- I er be moved he will
judge the peoples with I equity. 11 Let the heavens be glad, and let the I earth rejoice let the sea roar, and all that fills it 12 let
the field exult, and every- I thing in it! Then shall all the trees of the forest sing for joy 13 before the Lord, I for he comes, for he
comes to I judge the earth. He will judge the world in I righteousness, and the peoples in his I faithfulness. PRAYER Thanks to
You, O Father of light, for sending Your Son, Jesus Christ, to establish a kingdom of grace and forgiveness among men on this
earth. By Your Spirit make us new crea tures in heart, mind, soul, and sentiment, and teach us to sing the new song of this new
kingdom with rejoicing and glad ness, through Jesus Christ. Amen. 9 Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 97 r  Xhe 97th
psalm is a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ, just as the preceding psalm was. And the signifi cance is always this, that Christ
rules and maintains this kingdom through the Gospel, through which He sends out thunder and lightning and bums His enemies
and melts the mountains. That is, He brings low all holiness, all wisdom, power, and whatever is great so that they might be
holy, wise, great, and powerful through Him alone. Along with these enemies and mountains, the Israelite kingdom and worship
perish also, as well as all that is not Christ. For He alone shall endure, and all others pass away, as the stone in Daniel, cut from
the mountains, fills the whole world and scatters everything else and makes them to nothing (Daniel 2:34). He will be the
mountain filling the whole world. 97 1 The Lord reigns, let the I earth rejoice let the many coast-1 lands be glad! 2 Clouds and
thick darkness are all a-1 round him righteousness and justice are the foundation I of his throne. 3 Fire goes be-1 fore him and
bums up his adversaries I all around. 4 His lightnings light I up the world the earth sees and I trembles. s The mountains melt
like wax be-1 fore the Lord, before the Lord of I all the earth. 30 Psalm 97 6 The heavens proclaim his I righteousness/ and all
the peoples see his I glory. 7 All worshipers of images are put to shame, who make their boast in worthless I idols worship him, I
all you gods! 8 Zion hears and is glad, and the daughters of Ju- I dah rejoice, because of your judgments, I O Lord. 9 For you, O
Lord, are most high over I all the earth you are exalted far a- I bove all gods. 10 O you who love the Lord, hate I evil! He
preserves the lives of his saints he delivers them from the hand of the I wicked. 11 Light is sown for the I righteous, and joy for
the up- I right in heart. 12 Rejoice in the Lord, O you I righteous, and give thanks to his I holy name! PRAYER Rock of Ages,
cleft for me, Let me hide myself in Thee Let the water and the blood, From Thy riven side which flowed. Be of sin the double
cure: Cleanse me from its guilt and powr. Amen. (LSB 761 : 1 ) Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 9H r Sz 98th psalm, like
the preceding psalm, is a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ, which extends into all the world. It also calls us to be joyful and to
praise God for His salvation, that is, to preach and give thanks for the redemption given us through Christ. Here then is worship
not offerings given in Jerusalem, but preaching and thanks giving that He is King in righteousness over the entire world, that is,
that He has redeemed us from sin and death by Himself alone, without our merits. 93 1 Oh sing to the Lord a new song, for he
has done I marvelous things! His right hand and his holy arm have worked salva-1 tion for him. 2 The Lord has made known his
sal-1 vation he has revealed his righteousness in the sight of the I nations. 3 He has remembered his steadfast love and faithfuln
ess to the house of I Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation I of our God. 4 Make a joyful noise to the Lord, I all
the earth break forth into joyous song and sing I praises! 5 Sing praises to the Lord I with the lyre, with the lyre and the sound of
I melody! 6 With trumpets and the sound I of the hom make a joyful noise before the I King, the Lord! 7 Let the sea roar, and all
that I fills it the world and those who I dwell in it! 232 Psalm 99  Lei the rivers clap their hands let the hills sing for joy together 9
be-1 fore the Lord, for he comes to I judge the earth. He will judge the world with I righteousness, and the peoples with I equity.
PR A YER Honor, praise, and thanksgiving to You, O Christ, our God and Savior, for all Your wonderful works and the num
berless blessings with which You enrich us. Fill us with Your Spirit and create in us new hearts, that we may rejoice over Your
works and gifts all our days, and at our latter end receive us into that kingdom of light in which we shall fol low You wherever
You go. Amen. . r 99th psalm is a psalm of instruction that exhorts the people of Israel to praise their God in Ziondespite the fact
that the nations rage against them because they are a spe cial people of God before all others. They suffer much on that
PSALM 99 account. The psalmist praises Moses, Aaron, and Samuel, who were chief among the people of Israel. However, (as
the words declare) he also teaches the people of Israel them selves that they should know that true worship consists not in the
sacrifice of many cattle, but rather in knowing Gods wonders and giving Him thanks for making them godly and redeeming them
from sin. This psalm is also a prophecy of Christ, who rules the true Zion in all the world and has estab- 33 Reading the Psalms
with Luther lished His throne of grace and His footstool in heaven, on account of which all the world is now angry, raving, and
fool ish, and persecutes and kills the Christians. 99 1 The Lord reigns let the peoples I tremble! He sits enthroned upon the
cherubim let the I earth quake! 2 The Lord is great in I Zion he is exalted over all the I peoples. 3 Let them praise your great and
I awesome name! Ho-1 ly is he! 4 The King in his might loves I justice. You have established equity you have executed justice
and righteousness in I Jacob. 5 Exalt the Lord our God worship at his I footstool! Ho-1 ly is he! 6 Moses and Aaron were among
his priests, Samuel also was among those who called up- I on his name. They called to the Lord, and he I answered them. 7 In
the pillar of the cloud he I spoke to them they kept his testimonies and the statute that he I gave them. 8 O Lord our God, you I
answered them you were a forgiving God to them, but an avenger of their wrong- I doings. 9 Exalt the Lord our God, and
worship at his holy I mountain for the Lord our God is I holy! 234 Psalm 100 PRAYER Lord Jesus, be our Guide and our
Defense in this evil world, that we may never be ashamed to confess You before men, but may serve You in holy conversation
and constant fidelity. Restrain the evil counsels of those who set them selves against You and Your Church, and cause them to
see the evil of their ways, that they may be turned to You. Amen. C-ne 100th psalm is a prophecy of Christ. It calls on the entire
world to be joyful, to praise, and to give thanks, that is, to worship God and come to His throne and His courts, and to call on
Him with all confidence. For His grace is an eternal kingdom, which truly remains forever and ever. 1 Make a joyful noise to the
Lord, I all the earth! 2 "Serve the Lord with gladness! Come into his presence with I singing! 3 Know that the Lord, I he is God! It
is he who made us, and we are his we are his people, and the sheep of his I pasture. 4 Enter his gates with thanksgiving, and
his I courts with praise! Give thanks to him I bless his name! 5 For the Lord is good his steadfast love endures for-1 ever, and his
faithfulness to all gener-1 ations. Reading the Psalms with Luther PRAYER Spirit of grace and of prayer that proceeds from the
Father and the Son, grant us Your power, and intercede for us with sighings which cannot be uttered, that in spirit and in truth
we may give thanks to our Savior Jesus Christ for His love and truth. Anoint us with the oil of gladness to walk before our God in
a holy conversation, and to run the way of His Commandments. Amen. PSALM 101 r 101st psalm is a psalm of instruction in
which David uses himself as an example of how to have godly helpers and not tolerate evil servants. He accordingly lists the
various lusts and vices of an evil worker, which belongs in a longer commentary to explain. This he calls singing of steadfast
love and justice, that is, singing of how God is gracious to the godly and punishes the wicked, and how every work should be
doing good and shunning evil. How it shall go with them on these accounts is well depicted in Absalom, Ahithophel, Joab, and
others. For whoever wants to make and keep the people godly shall be burdened with all hatred and envy. Therefore, he may
well sing to God and give thanks to Him who has given grace and justice. Where God does not give this, such a song would
remain unsung. In its place only cursing and scolding would remain in the house and the only hope be hanging and beheadings
and the like. 36 Psalm 101 /?/ 1 I will sing of steadfast love and I justice to you, O Lord, I will make I music. 2 1 will ponder the
way that is blameless. Oh when will you I come to me? I will walk with integrity of heart with-1 in my house 3 1 will not set before
my eyes anything that is I worthless. I hate the work of those who fall away it shall not I cling to me. 4 A perverse heart shall be I
far from me I will know nothing of I evil. 5 Whoever slanders his neighbor secretly 11 will destroy. Whoever has a haughty look
and an arrogant heart I will I not endure. 6 I will look with favor on the faithful in the land, that they may I dwell with me he who
walks in the way that is blameless shall minis-1 ter to me. 7 No one who practices deceit shall dwell I in my house no one who
utters lies shall continue be-1 fore my eyes. 8 Morning by morning 1 will destroy all the wicked I in the land, cutting off all the
evildoers from the city I of the Lord. 37 RfceLt`P  ÃmÂ¯Be qÂ¿ efocte nTHEoPRAYER Lord, our God, Lord of lords and King of
kings, thanks be to You because You have blessed our beloved country with good and generous institutions of government.
Preserve civil and religious liberty to our children and us. Give able and faithful rulers in offices high and low, and cause righ
teousness and peace to flourish in the land unto its welfare and Your praise. Amen. r- PSALM 102 he 102nd psalm is a psalm of
prayer. In it the fathers of oldweary of laws, of sins, and of deathwhole heartedly yearn and call for the kingdom of grace
promised in Christ. They ask that God yet again build up Zion and set in place her stones and dust, that He would yet again
enter in and let His glory be seen in all kingdoms, that He would rescue His captives from sin and death so that they may come
together and thank Himthat is, that they may wor ship Him in the true Zionand the Old Testament come to an end. For without
Christ there is indeed nothing but strength broken in the middle of life and days cut short, that is, a mis erable, short, wretched
life from which the psalmist is reluc tantly removed. But in His kingdom is eternal life, and His time has no end. He is the one
who was before He created heaven and earth, and will again change and renew them. Therefore, He is outside of and over all
time. His year has no end and there is no dying there. This kingdom we will glad ly receive. May such a kingdom. Your kingdom,
come! Amen. Psalm 102 1 Hear my prayer, I O Lord let my cry I come to you! 2 Do not hide your face from me in the day of I my
distress! Incline your ear to me answer me speedily in the day I when I call! 3 For my days pass a-1 way like smoke, and my
bones bum like a I furnace. 4 My heart is struck down like grass and has I withered I forget to I eat my bread. 5 Because of my
loud I groaning my bones cling I to my flesh. 6 1 am like a desert owl of the I wilderness, like an owl of the waste I places 7 11 lie
awake I am like a lonely sparrow on the I housetop. 8 All the day my enemies I taunt me those who deride me use my name I for
a curse. 9 For I eat ashes I like bread and mingle tears I with my drink, 10 because of your indignation and I anger for you have
taken me up and I thrown me down. n My days are like an evening I shadow I wither a-1 way like grass. 12 But you, O Lord, are
enthroned for-1 ever you are remembered throughout all gener-1 ations. 239 READING THE PSAl.MS WITH LUTHER PRAYER
Bow down Your gracious ear to me And hear my cry, my prayer, my plea Make haste for my protection. For woes and fear
Surround me here. Help me in my affliction. You are my strength, my shield, my rock. My fortress that withstands each shock,
My help, my life, my tower. My battle sword. Almighty Lord Who can resist Your power? With You, O Lord, I cast my lot O faithful
God, forsake me not, To You my soul commending. Lord, be my stay, And lead the way Now and when life is ending. (Lsb 734 .
2 . 3 .4) 3 You will arise and have pity on I Zion it is the time to favor her the appointed I time has come. 14 For your servants
hold her I stones dear and have pity I on her dust. 15 Nations will fear the name I of the Lord/ and all the kings of the earth will
fear your I glory. 16 For the Lord builds up I Zion he appears in his I glory 17 he regards the prayer of the I destitute and does
not de-1 spise their prayer. 18 Let this be recorded for a genera-1 tion to come,  so that a people yet to be created may I praise
the Lord: 40 Psalm 102 19 that he looked down from his I holy height from heaven the Lord looked I at the earth, 20 to hear the
groans of the I prisoners, to set free those who were I doomed to die, 21 that they may declare in Zion the name I of the Lord,
and in Jerusa- I lem his praise, 22 when peoples gather to- I gether, and kingdoms, to wor-1 ship the Lord. 23 He has broken my
strength in I midcourse he has shortened I my days. 24 O my God, I say. take me not away in the midst l of my days you whose
years endure throughout all gener- I ations! 25 Of old you laid the foundation I of the earth, and the heavens are the work I of
your hands. 26 They will perish, but you I will remain they will all wear out like a I garment. You will change them like a robe, and
they will I pass away, 27 but you are the same, and your years I have no end. 28 The children of your servants shall I dwell
secure their offspring shall be established be- I fore you. PRAYER Thanks be to You, Lord Jesus, because in the fullness of time
You came and redeemed us from the power of that armed strong man. Build Your kingdom of grace among us, make us free
from the bonds of sin and the fear of death, and when the appointed time has come, receive us graciously out of this vale of
tears into Your everlasting kingdom of glory. Amen.  4 / Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 103 c/salm 103 is a psalm of
lhanks, beautifully and lov ingly made, in which the psalmist thanks God for all His goodness, namely, forgiveness of sins,
making a sound body and soul, giving us enough of all sorts of goods, making us joyful and confident, delivering us from
enemies and dis tress. In short, the psalmist thanks God that He is a gracious, compassionate, and loving Father toward us,
even though we are frail and unsteady creatures. God does not deal with us according to our sins, but according to His gracious
good ness in us, who acknowledge Him and keep His covenant. That is, we believe in Him and gladly will be godly and nei ther
arrogant nor stiff-necked in our holiness and righteous ness (which would indeed be a striving directly contrary to the covenant,
especially the First Commandment). This all comes to pass in Christ, who for this reason was promised and now is come, whose
kingdom reigns over all. For at the end, where He calls on the angels, mighty ones, servants, hosts, to give Him praise and let
His Word be heard, I am of the opinion that the psalm is speaking of Christ and His apostles, Gospel, and Churchwhere such
grace rules for what we need and what saves us all comes to pass in Christ and not outside of Him. /03 1 Bless the Lord, I O my
soul, and all that is within me, bless his I holy name! 2 Bless the Lord, I O my soul, and forget not all his I benefits, 3 who
forgives all your in-1 iquity, who heals all your dis-1 eases. Psalm 103 4 w ho redeems your life I from the pit, who crowns you
with steadfast love and I mercy, 5 who satisfies I you with good so that your youth is renewed like the I eagles. 6 The Lord works
I righteousness and justice for all who I are oppressed. 7 He made known his ways to I Moses, his acts to the people of I Israel.
8 The Lord is merciful and I gracious, slow to anger and abounding in I steadfast love. 9 He will not I always chide, nor will he
keep his anger for-1 ever. He does not deal with us according I to our sins, nor repay us according to our in- I iquities. 11 For as
high as the heavens are a-1 bove the earth, so great is his steadfast love toward those who I fear him 12 as far as the east is I
from the west, so far does he remove our transgres- I sions from us. n As a father shows compassion to his I children, so the
Lord shows compassion to those who I fear him. 14 For he I knows our frame he remembers that I we are dust. is As for man,
his days I are like grass he flourishes like a flower I of the field i 6 for the wind passes over it, and I it is gone, and its place
knows I it no more. '2 But the steadfast love of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting on those who I fear him, and his
righteousness to childrens I children, Reading the Psalms with Luther 18 to those who keep his I covenant and remember to do
his com I mandments. 19 The Lord has established his throne in the I heavens, and his kingdom rules I over all. 20 Bless the
Lord, O you his I angels, you mighty ones who do his word, obeying the voice I of his word! 21 Bless the Lord, I all his hosts, his
ministers, who I do his will! 22 Bless the Lord, all his works, in all places of his do- I minion. Bless the Lord, I O my soul!
PRAYER Father of light, we praise You because You forgive iniq uity and do not reward us according to our sins. What You
promised to the fathers You have fulfilled in Your Son. As the east and the west can never come together, so remove our sins
far from us, that they can be accounted to us no more, for the sake of Jesus Christ, our Savior. Amen. s- PSALM 104 me 104th
psalm is a psalm of thanks for all the works that God had accomplished in heaven and on earth, beyond those done for us here
on earth. He has surely ordered all things according to a wise place to produce works, fruits, and crops. The psalmist recounts
these one after the other: the heavensfull of light and outstretched as a tapestry without post or rafters the cloudsan arch 44
Psalm 104 without foundation or pillar the wind flying without wings the angels going and coming, appearing like a wind or a
flame. Thus sings the psalmist. He finds his desires and joy in Gods creations, which are so wonderfully made and so beautifully
ordered together. But who pays attention to this or sees that this is so? Only faith and the Spirit. 1 Bless the Lord, I O my soul! O
Lord my God, you are I very great! You are clothed with splendor and I majesty, 2 covering yourself with light as with a garment,
stretching out the heavens I like a lent. 3 He lays the beams of his chambers on the I waters he makes the clouds his chariot he
rides on the wings I of the wind 4 he makes his mes-1 sengers winds, his ministers a I flaming fire. 5 He set the earth on its
foun-1 dations, so that it should nev-1 er be moved. 6 You covered it with the deep as with a I garment the waters stood above
the I mountains. 7 At your re-1 buke they fled at the sound of your thunder they I took to flight. 8 The mountains rose, the valleys
I sank down to the place that you appoint-1 ed for them. 9 You set a boundary that they I may not pass, so that they might not
again cov-1 er the earth. 10 You make springs gush forth in the I valleys they flow be-1 tween the hills Reading the Psalms with
Luther 11 they give drink to every beast I of the field the wild donkeys I quench their thirst. 12 Beside them the birds of the I
heavens dwell they sing among the I branches. 13 From your lofty abode you water the I mountains the earth is satisfied with
the fruit I of your work. 14 You cause the grass to grow for the livestock and plants for man to I cultivate, that he may bring forth
food from the earth 15 and wine to gladden the I heart of man, oil to make his I face shine and bread to strengthen I mans heart.
PRAYER God, who in six days made all the creatures and ordered them for the benefit of man. You are worthy of praise. Teach
us to know that You are the Author of all that is, and grant that we may never abuse Your creation to our own destruc tion, but
use all of creation to Your glory and our welfare, through Jesus Christ. Amen. 16 The trees of the Lord are watered a-1
bundantly, the cedars of Lebanon that he I planted. 17 In them the birds I build their nests the stork has her home in the I fir
trees. 18 The high mountains are for the I wild goats the rocks are a refuge for the rock I badgers. 19 He made the moon to
mark the I seasons the sun knows its time for I setting. 20 You make darkness, and I it is night, when all the beasts of the forest I
creep about. 46 Psalm 104 21 The young lions roar I for their prey, seeking their I food from God. 22 When the sun rises, they I
steal away and lie down I in their dens. 23 Man goes out I to his work and to his labor until the I evening. 2 O Lord, how manifold
are your works! In wisdom have you I made them all the earth is full of your I creatures. 25 Here is the sea, I great and wide,
which teems with creatures innumerable, living things both I small and great. 26 There I go the ships, and Leviathan, which you
formed to I play in it. 27 These all I look to you, to give them their food in due I season. 2 When you give it to them, they gath-1
er it up when you open your hand, they are filled with I good things. 29 When you hide your face, they I are dismayed when you
lake away their breath, they die and return I to their dust. 30 When you send forth your Spirit, they are ere-1 ated, and you renew
the face I of the ground. 31 May the glory of the Lord endure for-1 ever may the Lord rejoice I in his works, 32 who looks on the
earth and it I trembles, who touches the mountains I and they smoke! 33 1 will sing to the Lord as long I as I live I will sing praise
to my God while I have I being.  24/7 Reading the Psalms with Luther 34 May my meditation be pleas-1 ing to him, for I rejoice I
in the Lord. 35 Let sinners be consumed from the earth, and let the wicked I be no more! Bless the Lord, O my soul! I Praise the
Lord! PRA YER Father in heaven, who provides for all Your creatures, supply us with all that we need for the support of this
body and life, even as Your Son taught us to pray: Give us this day our daily bread. Fill us with joyous confidence toward You,
that worrying cares be banished from our hearts, and we may never doubt that You will so bless our labors as to provide us with
food and clothing, and teach us to be there with content. Amen. PSALM 105 me 105th psalm is a psalm of thanks in which the
people of Israel give thanks for all the miracles of old that God had done from Abraham on, until they were brought into the land
of Canaan. The psalmist recounts them all one after another. He concludes as Moses did (Deuteronomy 9:4-6), noting that God
had not done such wonders on account of their goodness or merit, but for the sake of His covenant and promises that He had
spoken to Abraham. How pious they really were and what they truly deserved is shown in the following psalm.  4  Psalm 10S 1
Oh give thanks to the Lord call up-1 on his name make known his deeds among the I peoples! 2 Sing to him, sing prais-1 es to
him tell of all his I wondrous works! 3 Glory in his I holy name let the hearts of those who seek the I Lord rejoice! 4 Seek the Lord
I and his strength seek his presence con-1 tinually! 5 Remember the wondrous works that I he has done, his miracles, and the
judgments he I uttered, 6 O offspring of Abraham, his I servant, children of Jacob, his I chosen ones! 7 He is the I Lord our God
his judgments are in I all the earth. 8 He remembers his covenant for-1 ever, the word that he commanded, for a thousand
gener-1 ations, 9 the covenant that he made with I Abraham, his sworn promise to I Isaac, 10 which he confirmed to Jacob as a
I statute, to Israel as an everlasting covenant, I 11 saying, To you I will give the land of I Canaan as your portion for an in-1
heritance 12 When they were few in I number, of little account, and sojourners I in it, 13 wandering from nation to I nation, from
one kingdom to another I people, 14 he allowed no one to op-1 press them he rebuked kings on their account, I 15 saying,
Touch not my a-1 nointed ones, do my prophets I no harm! 249 Reading the Psalms with Luther 16 When he summoned a
famine I on the land and broke all sup-1 ply of bread, 17 he had sent a man a-1 head of them, Joseph, who was sold I as a
slave. 18 His feet were hurt with I fetters his neck was put in a col-1 lar of iron 19 until what he had said I came to pass, the word
of the Lord I tested him. 20 The king sent and re-1 leased him the ruler of the peoples I set him free 21 he made him lord I of his
house and ruler of all his pos-1 sessions, 22 to bind his princes at his I pleasure and to teach his elders I wisdom. PRAYER
According to Your mercy, You, O God, have established a covenant with us in Holy Baptism in which You have obli gated
Yourself to be our God and to forgive our sins for Christs sake. Thanks, everlasting thanks, be unto You this gracious covenant.
And now grant us grace to believe Your Word, and strength to persevere to the end, that we may adorn our profession in all
things, through Jesus Christ. Amen. 23 Then Israel came to I Egypt Jacob sojourned in the I land of Ham. 24 And the Lord made
his people very I fruitful and made them stronger I than their foes. 25 He turned their hearts to hate his I people, to deal craftily
with his I servants. 26 He sent Moses, his I servant, and Aaron, whom he had I chosen. Psalm 105 27 They performed his signs
a-1 mong them and miracles in the I land of Ham. 28 He sent darkness, and made the I land dark they did not rebel a-1 gainst
his words. 29 He turned their waters I into blood and caused their I fish to die. 30 Their land I swarmed with frogs, even in the
chambers I of their kings. 31 He spoke, and there came I swarms of flies, and gnats throughout their I country. 32 He gave them
I hail for rain, and fiery lightning bolts I through their land. 33 He struck down their vines and I fig trees, and shattered the trees
of their I country. 34 He spoke, and the I locusts came, young locusts without I number, 35 which devoured all the vegetation I in
their land and ate up the fruit I of their ground. 36 He struck down all the firstborn I in their land, the firstfruits of I all their
strength. 37 Then he brought out Israel with sil-1 ver and gold, and there was none among his tribes who I stumbled. 38 Egypt
was glad when they de-1 parted, for dread of them had fallen up-1 on it. 39 He spread a cloud for a I covering, and fire to give I
light by night. 40 They asked, and he I brought quail, and gave them bread from heaven in a-1 bundance. 43 He opened the
rock, and water I gushed out it flowed through the desert like a I river. 42 For he remembered his holy I promise, and Abraham,
his I servant. Reading the Psalms with Luther 4 So he brought his people I out with joy, his chosen ones with I singing. 44 And
he gave them the lands of the I nations, and they took possession of the fruit of the I peoples toil, 45 that they might keep his I
statutes and observe his laws. I Praise the Lord! PRAYER Let us worship the Lord, our God, and give thanks unto His holy
name, because He has awakened unto us the Prophet like unto Moses, by whom we are delivered out of the kingdom of
darkness, and are made heirs of everlasting light. Praise the Lord. Amen. PSALM 106 r he 106th psalm is a psalm of thanks in
which the psalmist acknowledges all the sins that the people of Israel had committed against God, by which they had made
them selves unworthy for all His grace and blessings. Therefore, it says constantly that God has done all these things for His
names sake and for the remembrance of His covenant. Moses also says this (Deuteronomy 9:6), therefore they cannot glory in
themselves except in His grace aloneas we also can have no other glory. /06 1 Praise the Lord! Oh give thanks to the Lord, for I
he is good, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever! PsaJm 106 2 Who can utter the mighty deeds I of the Lord/ or declare I all
his praise? 3 Blessed are they who observe I justice/ who do righteousness I at all times!  Remember me, O Lord, when you
show favor to your I people/' help me when you I save them, 3 that 1 may look upon the prosperity of your chosen ones, that I
may rejoice in the gladness of your I nation, that I may glory with your in- I heritance. 6 Both we and our fathers I have sinned/
we have committed iniquity we have done ! wickedness. 7 Our fathers, when they were in Egypt, did not consider your I
wondrous works/ they did not remember the abundance of your steadfast love, but rebelled by the Sea, at the I Red Sea. 8 Yet
he saved them for his I names sake/ that he might make known his I mighty power. 9 He rebuked the Red Sea, and it be- I came
dry/ and he led them through the deep as through a I desert. 10 So he saved them from the hand I of the foe  and redeemed
them from the power of the I enemy. 11 And the waters covered their adver- I saries  not one of I them was left. '2 Then they
be-1 lieved his words/ they I sang his praise. 13 But they soon for- I got his works/ they did not wait for his I counsel. RhADING
THh PSALMS WITH LUTHfcR 14 But they had a wanton craving in the I wilderness, and pul God to the test in the I desert 15 he
gave them I what they asked, but sent a wasting disease a- I mong them. PR A YER Good, O Lord, have been Your thoughts
and great Your loving-kindness toward us. Grant us Your Spirit to work in us, hearts that know and acknowledge Your mercies,
and withdraw not Your hand from us. Do not remember our ingratitude and unworthiness, but remember the grace You have
promised to sinners in Your Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen. 16 When men in the camp were jealous of I Moses and Aaron,
the holy one I of the Lord, 17 the] efÂ»eCpzetqamk PcÂ¿eÂ«eÂ¹Â¥Âªtoyv,Iaeg4oÂ°I Abiram. 18 Fire also broke out in their I company the
flame burned up the I wicked. 19 They made a calf in I Horeb and worshiped a metal I image. 20 They exchanged the glo- I ry of
God for the image of an ox that I eats grass. 21 They forgot God, their I Savior, who had done great things in I Egypt, 22
wondrous works in the I land of Ham, and awesome deeds by the I Red Sea. 23 Therefore he said he would de- I stroy them
had not Moses, his chosen one, stood in the breach before him, to turn away his wrath from de- I stroying them. Psalm 106 PR
A YER O Lord, teach us to profit by the examples that were writ ten for our warning, the punishments which You visited on Your
people Israel because of their sins. Enlighten our eyes to see the abomination of sin, that we may dread Your aveng ing justice,
may strive to avoid all manner of evil, and may flee to the cross of Christ, the only Refuge for the soul. Amen. 24 Then they
despised the I pleasant land, having no faith in his I promise. 25 They murmured I in their tents, and did not obey the voice I of
the Lord. 26 Therefore he raised his hand and I swore to them that he would make them fall in the I wilderness, 27 and would
make their offspring fall among the I nations, scattering them a- I mong the lands. 28 Then they yoked themselves to the Baal I
of Peor, and ate sacrifices offered I to the dead 29 they provoked the Lord to anger I with their deeds, and a plague broke out a-
I mong them. 30 Then Phinehas stood up and I intervened, and the I plague was stayed. 31 And that was counted to him as I
righteousness from generation to generation for- I ever. 32 They angered him at the waters of I Meribah, and it went ill with
Moses on I their account, 33 for they made his spirit I bitter, and he spoke rashly I with his lips. 34 They did not destroy the I
peoples, as the Lord com- I manded them. Reading the Psai.ms with Luther 35 bui they mixed with the I nations and learned to
do I as they did. 36 They served their I idols, which became a I snare to them. 37 They sacrificed I their sons and their daughters
to the I demons 38 they poured out innocent blood, the blood of their sons and I daughters, whom they sacrificed to the idols of
Canaan, and the land was polluted I with blood. 39 Thus they became unclean I by their acts, and played the whore I in their
deeds. 40 Then the anger of the Lord was kindled against his I people, and he abhorred his I heritage 41 he gave them into the
hand of the I nations, so that those who hated them ruled I over them. 42 Their enemies op- I pressed them, and they were
brought into subjection un-1 der their power. 43 Many times he de- I livered them, but they were rebellious in their purposes and
were brought low through their in-1 iquity. 44 Nevertheless, he looked upon I their distress, when he I heard their cry. 45 For
their sake he remembered his I covenant, and relented according to the abundance of his I steadfast love. 46 He caused them
to be I pitied by all those who held them I captive. 47 Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the I nations, that we
may give thanks to your holy name and glory I in your praise. Psalm 107 48 Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, from
everlasting to ever-1 lasting! And let all the people say, Amen! I Praise the Lord! PR AYER Lord Jesus, we give You most hearty
thanks because You have revealed to us the saving truth of Your Gospel. Grant us grace to continue in Your Word, that we walk
not after our own thoughts, but worship You in spirit and in truth. Preserve Your Word for our children, that they may walk in
Your ways and remain Your people for generations to come. Amen. r  he 107th psalm is a psalm of thanks for the help that God
shows to all people in their distress, whether they are Gentile or Jew. This help the heathen have sought by various idols and we
Christians and the heathen have sought by various saints up until now (and to a great extent still do): For example, St. Leonard
has released the prisoners, St. Bastian delivers from pestilence, St. George protects in battle, St. Erasmus makes one rich, and
St. Christopher has become the god of sea and water. We have thus divided all of Gods help among the saints, as the heathen
among their idols, and have stolen and robbed from Godto whom alone this psalm is dedicated and to whom alone the psalm
calls on us to thank. Reading the Psalms with Luther /C?7 1 Oh give thanks to the Lord, for i he is good, for his steadfast love
endures for-1 ever! 2 Let the redeemed of the Lord I say so, whom he has redeemed from I trouble 3 and gathered in I from the
lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and I from the south. 4 Some wandered in I desert wastes, finding no way
to a city to I dwell in 5 hungry and I thirsty, their soul fainted with-1 in them. 6 Then they cried to the Lord in their I trouble, and
he delivered them from I their distress. 7 He led them by a I straight way till they reached a city to I dwell in. 8 Let them thank the
Lord for his I steadfast love, for his wondrous works to the chil-1 dren of men! 9 For he satisfies the I longing soul, and the
hungry soul he fills I with good things. 10 Some sat in darkness and in the shad-1 ow of death, prisoners in affliction I and in
irons, 11 for they had rebelled against the I words of God, and spumed the counsel of the I Most High. 12 So he bowed their
hearts down with hard I labor they fell down, with I none to help. 13 Then they cried to the Lord in their I trouble, and he
delivered them from I their distress. 14 He brought them out of darkness and the shad-1 ow of death, and burst their I bonds
apart. Psalm 107 PR A YER My sins fill me with care. Yet I will not despair. I build on Christ, who loves me From this rock
nothing moves me. To Him I will surrender. To Him, my souls defender. If death my portion be, It brings great gain to me It
speeds my lifes endeavor To live with Christ forever. He gives me joy in sorrow, Come death now or tomorrow, ojsb 745:2.3) 15
Let them thank the Lord for his I steadfast love, for his wondrous works to the chil- I dren of men! 16 For he shatters the I doors
of bronze and cuts in two the I bars of iron. 17 Some were fools through their I sinful ways, and because of their iniquities
suffered af- I fliction 18 they loathed any I kind of food, and they drew near to the I gates of death. 19 Then they cried to the Lord
in their I trouble, and he delivered them from I their distress. 20 He sent out his word and I healed them, and delivered them from
their de- I struction. 21 Let them thank the Lord for his I steadfast love, for his wondrous works to the chil- I dren of men! 22 And
let them offer sacrifices of thanks- I giving, and tell of his deeds in I songs of joy! 23 Some went down to the I sea in ships, doing
business on the great I waters 24 they saw the deeds I of the Lord, his wondrous works I in the deep. Rhading THt Psalms with
Lithlr 2i For he commanded and raised the I stormy wind, which lifted up the waves I of the sea. 26 They mounted up to heaven
they went down I to the depths their courage melted away in their I evil plight 27 they reeled and staggered like I drunken men
and were at their I wits end. 28 Then they cned to the Lord in their I trouble, and he delivered them from I their distress. 29 He
made the I storm be still, and the waves of the I sea were hushed. 10 Then they were glad that the waters were I quiet, and he
brought them to their desired I haven. RRA YKR O Jesus, with bitter suffering, pain, and anguish. You redeemed our souls from
the power of Satan. Enlighten our eyes to see Your love, and grant us patience in the sufferings, pain, and labors of this present
life. Keep us steadfast in Your faith, that through You we attain that better life, where pain and sickness shall be no more, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Amen. 31 Let them thank the Lord for his I steadfast love, for his wondrous works to the
chil-1 dren of men!  32 Let them extol him in the congregation of the I people, and praise him in the assembly of the I elders. 33
He turns rivers into a I desert, springs of water into I thirsty ground, 34 a fruitful land into a I salty waste, because of the evil of its
in-1 habitants. 35 He turns a desert into pools of I water, a parched land into springs of I water. 60 Psalm 107 38 And there he
lets the I hungry dwell," and they establish a city to I live in 57 they sow fields and plant I vineyards and get a I fruitful yield. 38
By his blessing they multiply I greatly/ and he does not let their livestock di- I minish. 39 When they are diminished and I brought
low through oppression, evil, and I sorrow, 40 he pours contempt on I princes" and makes them wander in I trackless wastes 41
but he raises up the needy out of af- I fliction and makes their families I like flocks. 42 The upright see it I and are glad, and all
wickedness I shuts its mouth. 43 Whoever is wise, let him attend I to these things let them consider the steadfast love I of the
Lord. PR A YER Thanks and praise be to You, Keeper of Israel, because You have guarded us in many a danger and helped us
in many a need. Let Your good providence be over us in the future as in the past. Cause us steadfastly to trust in You, and to
look to none other for help, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.  6 / Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 108 108th psalm
is a psalm of thanks, with words almost like Psalm 60, in which the psalmist gives thanks for Gods kingdom. Already in the first
verse, the psalm exalts the kingdom of Christ and prays that God will establish His kingdom in all the world and accordingly
bring Davids kingdom to its proper, final, full station. For David had only a slight, partial piece (compared to the whole world) of
that which was promised to come to him. As Isaiah 9:7 also says, He will reign on the throne of David and over his kingdom. /as
1 My heart is steadfast, I O God! 1 will sing and make melody with all my I being! 2 Awake, OI harp and lyre! I will a-1 wake the
dawn! JI will give thanks to you, O Lord, among the I peoples I will sing praises to you among the I nations. 4 For your steadfast
love is great above the I heavens your faithfulness reaches I to the clouds. 5 Be exalted, O God. above the I heavens! Let your
glory be over I all the earth! 6 That your beloved ones may be de-1 livered, give salvation by your right hand and I answer me! o
Psalm 108 7 God has promised in his I holiness: With exultation I will divide up Shechem and portion out the Valley of I Succoth.
8 Gilead is mine Manasseh I is mine Ephraim is my helmet, Judah my I scepter. 9 Moab is my washbasin upon Edom 11 cast
my shoe over Philistia I shout in I triumph. 10 Who will bring me to the fortified I city? Who will lead me to I Edom? n Have you
not rejected us, I O God? You do not go out, O God, with our I armies. 12 Oh grant us help a-1 gainst the foe, for vain is the
salva-1 tion of man! 13 With God we shall do I valiantly it is he who will tread I down our foes. PRAYER You, Lord Jesus, we
worship as our King: to You we have vowed allegiance, and under You do we desire to live. So govern us by Your Spirit that we
always remain citizens in Your kingdom of grace, and when our earthly pilgrimage is ended, receive us into Your kingdom of
glory, that with all the hosts of heaven we may forever magnify Your holy name. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM
109 C/he 109th psalm is a psalm of prayer, prayed in the person of Christ against Judas, His betrayer, and against the Jews, His
crucifiers. In Acts 1:20 St. Peter applied this psalm to Judas when they were selecting Matthias to replace him. He did not mean
to say that the psalm speaks only about Judas.... The psalm begins with Judas and then extends to everyone of Judas' ilk, to all
schismatics and persecutors of the Word of Christ for they always slander the truth and persecute the genuine Christians. (From
Luthers commentary on the four psalms of comfort, Luther's Works 14:257) Christ Himself complains of these matters in Psalm
109:2. . .. For thus the enemies of the truth are accustomed to obscure, traduce, and corrupt the fruits and gains of the Gospel
and of salvation among simple and godly hearers... . (These enemies adom themselves with false and counter feit praises but
they defame us, in order to make us more obnoxious to those who are strangers to our doctrine. (From Luthers lectures on
Genesis 39:13-15, Luthers Works 7:92) /&9  Be not silent, O God I of my praise! 2 For wicked and deceitful mouths are opened
against me, speaking against me with I lying tongues. 3 They encircle me with I words of hate, and attack me I without cause. 4
In return for my love they ac-1 cuse me, but I give my-1 self to prayer. 5 So they reward me e-1 vil for good, and hatred I for my
love. 264 Psalm 109 PRAYER Excellent, O Lord Jesus, is Your love which You have shown toward us in that You came into our
flesh, and suf fered such contradiction of sinners against Yourself. Grant us a will so conformed to Your will, that we do not fear
the hatred and the mockery of the wicked, but suffering ridicule patiently, follow You all the days of our lives. Amen. 6 Appoint a
wicked man a-1 gainst him let an accuser stand at his I right hand. 7 When he is tried, let him come forth I guilty let his prayer be
count-1 ed as sin! 8 May his I days be few may another take his I office! 9 May his children be I fatherless and his wife a I
widow! 10 May his children wander a- I bout and beg, seeking food far from the ruins they in-1 habit! 11 May the creditor seize
all I that he has may strangers plunder the fruits I of his toil! 12 Let there be none to extend kind-1 ness to him, nor any to pity
his fatherless I children! 13 May his posterity I be cut off may his name be blotted out in the second gener-1 ation! h May the
iniquity of his fathers be remembered be-1 fore the Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be I blotted out! is Let them be before
the Lord con-1 tinually, that he may cut off the memory of them I from the earth! HEADING THE rSALMS WITH LUTHER 16 For
he did not remember to show I kindness but pursued the poor and needy and the brokenhearted, to put I them to death. 17 He
loved to curse let curses come up-1 on him! He did not delight in blessing may it be I far from him! 18 He clothed himself with
cursing I as his coat may it soak into his body like water, like oil in-1 to his bones! 19 May it be like a garment that he wraps a-1
round him  like a belt that he puts on I evry day! 20 May this be the reward of my accusers I from the Lord, of those who speak
evil a-1 gainst my life! PRAYER O Lord Jesus, how deeply were You humbled since You condescended daily to walk with Your
betrayer, though the malice of his heart was not hid from You. Surely You desire the salvation of sinners. Have compassion on
my poor soul, wash it with Your blood, and grant me strength to resist sin, that I may overcome and inherit the blessing. Amen.
21 But you, O God my Lord, deal on my behalf for your I names sake because your steadfast love is good, de-1 liver me! 22 For
1 am poor and I needy, and my heart is stricken with-1 in me. 23 1 am gone like a shadow at I evening I am shaken off like a I
locust. 24 My knees are weak through I fasting my body has become gaunt, I with no fat. Psalm 109 25 1 am an object of scorn
to my ac-1 cusers when they see me, they I wag their heads. 26 Help me, O I Lord my God! Save me according to your I
steadfast love! 27 Let them know that this I is your hand you, O Lord, have I done it! 28 Let them curse, but I you will bless! They
arise and are put to shame, but your servant I will be glad! 29 May my accusers be clothed with dis-1 honor may they be
wrapped in their own shame as I in a cloak! 30 With my mouth I will give great thanks I to the Lord 1 will praise him in the midst I
of the throng. 31 For he stands at the right hand of the I needy, to save him from those who condemn his I soul to death.
PRAYER Thanks be to You, O Lord Jesus, for Your bitter suffering and Your shameful death, by which You, as a faithful High
Priest, have purchased us from the curse of the Law. Grant us the gift of Your Spirit, that we may live in true repentance, and
may bring before our Father a soul sprinkled with Your sacred blood. Amen. 67 RhADIMj I Hh PsaI MS WITH LlTHfcK HSAIM
110 cXhc 1 l()th psalm is a prophecy of Christ, that He shall he an eternal king and priest, indeed true God, sitting at the right
hand of God the Father, and that He would be glorified and recognized. In the entire Scripture there is nothing like this psalm. It
would be right to acknowledge it as the chief confirmation of the Christian faith. For nowhere else is Christ prophesied with such
clear, plain words as a priest and an eternal priest. It is prophesied as well that the priesthood of Aaron would be abolished. This
psalm is yet again and more splendidly extolled in the Epistle to the Hebrews. It is indeed a shame that such a psalm is not more
richly extolled by Christians. //& ' The Lord says to my Lord: Sit at my I nght hand, until I make your enemies your I footstool." 2
The Lord sends forth from Zion your mighty I scepter. Rule in the midst of your I enemies! J Your people will offer themselves
freely on the day of your power, in holy I garments from the womb of the morning, the dew of your youth I will be yours. 4 The
Lord has sworn and will not I change his mind, You are a priest forever after the order of Mel-1 chizedek  5 The Lord is at your I
right hand he will shatter kings on the day I of his wrath. 6 He will execute judgment among the nations, filling them with I
corpses he will shatter chiefs over the I wide earth.  6  Psalm 111 7 He will drink from the brook I by the way therefore he will lift l
up his head. PKA Yt K Praise and honor belong to You. everlasting Word, because You were made flesh and sacrificed Yourself
upon the cross as the ottering for sin, Govern us according to Your wisdom, defend us against our enemies speak for us with
Your Father, and let us live under You in Your kingdom in everlasting righteousness, innocence, and blessedness. Amen.
PSALM 111 r  ne 111th psalm is a psalm of thanks for the people of Israel to sing at the Passover, concerning the Passover
Lamb. In this psalm they learn to praise God and give thanks in a fine, short song for all His wonderful works, especially for the
spiritual authority, priesthood, Passover. Law, Word, freedom, justice, the land, help, and other blessings. /// 1 Praise the Lord! I
will give thanks to the Lord with my I whole heart, in the company of the upright, in the congre- I gation. 2 Great are the works I
of the Lord, " studied by all who de-1 light in them. 3 Full of splendor and majesty I is his work, 4 and his righteousness endures
for-1 ever. 69 Reading the Psalms with Luther 4 He has caused his wondrous works to be re- I membered the Lord is gracious
and I merciful. 5 He provides food for those who I fear him he remembers his covenant for-1 ever. 6 He has shown his people
the power I of his works, in giving them the inheritance of the I nations. 7 The works of his hands are faith- I ful and just all his
precepts are ! trustworthy 8 they are established forever and I ever, to be performed with faithfulness and up-1 rightness. 9 He
sent redemption to his people he has commanded his covenant for- I ever. Holy and awesome I is his name! ,0 The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom all those who practice it have a good under- I standing. His praise endures for- I ever! PRAYER
Praise belongs to You, our God, because You have ful filled Your promises to Your people Israel in the incarnation of Your Son,
and sent the light of Your truth to our fathers when they were walking in ignorance of You. Grant us stead fastly to trust Your
covenant of grace that we may live there in. Make Your works of mercy and truth known to our chil dren, that they may praise
Your name in generations to come. Amen. 70 Psalm 112 PSALM 112 le 112ih psalm is a psalm of comfort in which the pious,
who fear God. are praised for their good life and are promised eternal comfort against all trouble. They are espe cially
commended to a sincere confidence and trust in Gods grace, so that they may be undismayed and undaunt ed (which is the
real, true faith) until they see the destruc tion of the godless and their foes. /K2 1 Praise the Lord! Blessed is the man who I fears
the Lord, who greatly delights in his com- I mandments! 2 His offspring will be mighty I in the land the generation of the upright I
will be blessed. 3 Wealth and riches are I in his house, and his righteousness endures for- I ever. 4 Light dawns in the darkness
for the I upright he is gracious, merciful, and I righteous. 5 It is well with the man who deals generous- I ly and lends who
conducts his affairs with I justice. 6 For the righteous will nev- I er be moved he will be remembered for- I ever. 7 He is not afraid
of I bad news his heart is firm, trusting I in the Lord. 8 His heart is steady he will not I be afraid, until he looks in triumph on his
adver- I saries.  7 / Reading the Psalms with Luther 9 He has distributed freely he has given to the poor his righteousness
endures for-1 ever his horn is exalted in I honor. 10 The wicked man sees it and is angry he gnashes his teeth and I melts away
the desire of the wicked will I perish! PR AYER O Lord, the Reward of them that fear You, and the Defense of Your people, who
in Your Son, Jesus Christ, has promised grace and everlasting righteousness to them that believe, establish our hearts by Your
grace that, rooted in the faith of Your Word, we may be able to stand in the day of trial. Strengthen us to resist the enticing lust of
sin, and to triumph over Satan, death, and hell through Jesus Christ. Amen. r 113th psalm is a prophecy of the kingdom of
Christ, which from the rising of the sun to its setting shall extend over all the nations. The psalm calls on all nations to praise
God and proclaim His grace. He is a God of the poor and the troubled, a delightful God and worthy of our grace, who sits on
high and loves and exalts the humble. This is Christs office and work in His kingdom: to humble the exalted, to make foolish the
wise, to damn the holy, to with er the fruitful, and on the other hand to exalt the humble, to make holy the sinner, and to make
the barren into a joyful mother of children. PsaJm 113 // 1 Praise the Lord! Praise, O servants I of the Lord, praise the name I of
the Lord! 2 Blessed be the name I of the Lord from this time forth and for I evermore! 3 From the rising of the sun to its I setting, 
the name of the Lord is l to be praised!  The Lord is high above all I nations, and his glory above the I heavens! 5 Who is like the
I Lord our God, who is seated I on high, 6 who looks I far down on the heavens I and the earth? 7 He raises the poor I from the
dust and lifts the needy from the I ash heap. 8 to make them sit with I princes, with the princes of his I people. 9 He gives the
barren worn- I an a home, making her the joyous mother of children. I Praise the Lord! PRAYER Blessed be the Son of David,
who came in the name of the Lord to establish a kingdom of grace on the earth who has also called us and has made us citizens
of His kingdom, partakers of His grace. May He, our King, by His good Spirit so guide and govern us as to bring us out of this
world, so full of sin, into that eternal kingdom wherein dwells righ teousness. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 114
r 114th psalm is a psalm of thanks, for the peo ple of Israel to praise God at Passover for His wonderful works. He had led them
out of Egypt, through the Red Sea, through the dry wilderness, mountains, and the Jordan, into the Promised Land. We sing (his
psalm daily to Christ to praise Him who has led us out of death and sin, through the wilderness of the flesh and the devil, into an
eternal life. //4 1 When Israel went out from I Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange I language, 2 Judah became
his sanctu-1 ary, Israel his do-1 minion. 3 The sea I looked and fled Jordan I turned back. 4 The mountains 1 skipped like rams,
the I hills like lambs. 5 What ails you, O sea, I that you flee? O Jordan, that you I turn back? 8 O mountains, that you I skip like
rams? O I hills, like lambs? 7 Tremble, O earth, at the presence 1 of the Lord, at the presence of the God of I Jacob, 8 who turns
the rock into a pool of 1 water, the flint into a spring of I water. PsaJm 115 PRAYER Teach us, O God, to know Your mighty
works and Your wondrous ways, that our soul may bow to Your Majesty and may give to You honor and praise. Enlighten our
eyes to see in Jesus Christ the way, the truth, and the life, and grant us grace to walk in this way, to adhere to this truth, and to
win eternal life. Amen. rr-' PSALM 115 c 115th psalm is a psalm of thanks in which God is praised that He is the true, helping
God. All other gods are vain idols that cannot help us. Therefore, we pray in verse 1, Not to us, O Lord that is, do not look at how
religious and respectable we are, lest You no longer help us and we become like the heathen, a people without God, or again,
as those who have a helpless god, as they accuse us. But rather look to Your glory and to Your name, that You are called and
reputed to be a true, living God, abundant in help. For Your names sake come with us, not for our names sakethat we are called
Gods servants, workers, singers, fasters, and well-doersfor such names the hea then also can have and are of no help. //5 1 Not
to us, O Lord, not to us, but to your name give I glory, for the sake of your steadfast love and your I faithfulness! 2 Why should
the I nations say, Where I is their God? Reading the Psalms with Luther 3 Our God is in the I heavens he does all that he I
pleases. 4 Their idols are sil- I ver and gold, the work of I human hands. 5 They have mouths, but I do not speak eyes, but I do
not see. 6 They have ears, but I do not hear noses, but I do not smell. 7 They have hands, but do not feel feet, but I do not walk
and they do not make a sound I in their throat. 8 Those who make them be- I come like them so do all who I trust in them. PR A
YER O God. You have been our Helper in the past, preserving us unto this day in body and soul. Forsake us not, but demonstra
te to the world that You are the God of heaven, rul ing over all, and mighty to save. Cast down the idols of the heathen by the
Word of the cross, and build the kingdom of Your Son in our hearts. Amen. 9 O Israel, trust I in the Lord! He is their help I and
their shield. 10 O house of Aaron, trust I in the Lord! He is their help I and their shield. " You who fear the Lord, trust I in the
Lord! He is their help I and their shield. 12 The Lord has remembered us he will I bless us he will bless the house of Israel he will
bless the house of I Aaron l Psalm 115 13 he will bless those who I fear the Lord, both the small I and the great. h May the Lord
give you I increase, you and your I children! 1 5 May you be blessed I by the Lord, who made I heaven and earth!  6 The
heavens are the Lords I heavens, but the earth he has given to the chil-1 dren of man. 1 7 The dead do not I praise the Lord, nor
do any who go down into I silence.  8 But we will I bless the Lord from this time forth and forevermore. I Praise the Lord!
PRAYER Lord, this I ask, O hear my plea. Deny me not this favor When Satan sorely troubles me. Then do not let me waver. O
guard me well. My fear dispel, Fulfill Your faithful saying: All who believe By grace receive An answer to their praying. Amen.
(LSB 758:3) 77 Reading the Psalms with Luther  7 -- PSALM 116 C-he 116th psalm is a psalm of thanks in which the psalmist is
joyful and gives thanks that God has heard his prayer and has rescued him from the distress of death and the anguish of hell.
Like several other psalms above, it speaks of the deep spiritual affliction, of which few people know. He laments in this psalm
that things are so bad, yet he confesses his faith and the truth of God. He calls all human holiness, virtue, and confidence only
falsehood and empti ness. This the world will not and cannot hear nor tolerate. Thus it comes that the godly suffer, tremble, and
fear all kinds of misfortune. But despite all, he is comforted by this, that Gods Word is true and will only motivate us the more:
They give me to drink from the cup of their wrath. All right, then 1 will take the cup of grace and salvation and drink myself spiri
tually drunk and (through preaching) pour out from this cup on those who will drink with me and who draw their grace from the
Word. This is our cup, and with this cup we will worship God and praise His name. We will fulfill our vows, namely the First
Commandment, that we receive Him as the one God and praise Him as the only God worthy to preach and to be called upon.
You find here also that giving thanks, preaching, and confessing Gods name before all people is the true worship of God. 7
Psalm 116 //6 1 1 love the Lord, because I he has heard my voice and my pleas for I mercy. 2 Because he inclined his I ear to
me, therefore 1 will call on him as long I as I live. 3 The snares of death encompassed me the pangs of Sheol laid I hold on me I
suffered distress and I anguish. 4 Then I called on the name I of the Lord: "O Lord, I pray, deliv-1 er my soul! 5 Gracious is the
Lord, and I righteous our God is I merciful. 6 The Lord preserves the I simple when I was brought low, he I saved me. 7 Return,
O my soul, I to your rest for the Lord has dealt bountifully I with you. 8 For you have delivered my I soul from death, my eyes
from tears, my feet from I stumbling 9 1 will walk be-1 fore the Lord in the land of the I living. 10 1 believed, even I when 1
spoke, 1 am greatly af-1 flicted n I said in I my alarm, All mankind are I liars. 12 What shall I render I to the Lord for all his
bene-1 fits to me? 13 1 will lift up the cup of sal-1 vation and call on the name I of the Lord, 14 1 will pay my vows I to the Lord in
the presence of all his I people. Reading the Psalms with Luther ,s Precious in the sight I of the Lord 1  1 is the death I of his
saints. 16 O Lord, I am your I servant I am your servant, the son of your maidservant. You have I loosed my bonds. 17 1 will
offer to you the sacrifice of thanks-1 giving and call on the name I of the Lord. 18 1 will pay my vows I to the Lord in the
presence of all his I people, 19 in the courts of the house I of the Lord, in your midst, O Jerusalem. I Praise the Lord! PRAYER
We give thanks to You. our God, who has hitherto gra ciously and mightily helped us in all our needs. Be our refuge and our
help, and when our last day comes, grant that we fall asleep commending our souls into the hands of Your Son, Jesus Christ,
confident that through His name our death is precious in Your sight. Amen. PSALM 117  Tie 117th psalm is a prophecy of Christ,
that the entire world should praise Him and worship Him in His kingdom. In this kingdom, nothing reigns but grace and truth, that
is, the forgiveness of sins, eternal life, and all joy and comfort over sins, death, and all evil. This psalm is abundantly enough
explained in our commentary. I certainly believe that there is not one who truly knows everything the Holy Spirit says in this short
psalm. If they were forced to teach or instruct someone from it, they Psalm 117 would not know at which end to begin. To put
these vicious people to shame and to honor Gods Word, I have taken it upon myself to interpret this psalm, so that one may see
how clear Gods Word is, how simple, and yet how alto gether .. . inexhaustible in power and virtue. It renews and refreshes the
heart, restoring, relieving, comforting, and strengthening us constantly. Luther's Works i4.8 //? 1 Praise the Lord, all I nations!
Extol him, all I peoples! 2 For great is his steadfast I love toward us, and the faithfulness of the Lord endures forever. I Praise the
Lord! PRAYER Honor and praise do we of the Gentile nations ascribe to You, O Lord, for Your mercy because You have called
us into the kingdom of Your dear Son. Grant Your grace and truth to abide with us, and to guide us through the valley of death
into Your everlasting kingdom of heavenly glory, through Jesus Christ, our Savior. Amen. c e 118th psalm is a psalm of thanks
and my dear est, most beloved Confitemini the Latin title of the psalm. It gives thanks and also prophesies of the Christian and
of Christ, the rejected cornerstone. This psalm is a general statement of thanksgiving for all the kindnesses God daily and
unceasingly showers on all men, both good and evil. .. . This psalm praises God espe- Reading the Psalms with Luther daily for
the greatest benefit He bestowed on the world, namely, for Christ and His kingdom of gracefirst prom ised and now revealed. (
Luther's Works 14:47) //& 1 Oh give thanks to the Lord, for I he is good for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever! 2 Let I Israel
say, His steadfast love endures for-1 ever. 3 Let the house of I Aaron say, His steadfast love endures for-1 ever." 4 Let those
who fear the I Lord say, His steadfast love endures for- I ever. 5 Out of my distress I called I on the Lord the Lord answered me
and I set me free. 6 The Lord is on my side I I will not fear. What can man I do to me? 7 The Lord is on my side as my I helper I
shall look in triumph on those who I hate me. 8 It is belter to take refuge I in the Lord than to I trust in man. 9 It is better to lake
refuge I in the Lord than to trust in I princes. 10 All nations sur-1 rounded me in the name of the Lord I I cut them off! n They
surrounded me, surrounded me on I every side in the name of the Lord I I cut them off! 12 They surrounded me like bees they
went out like a fire a-1 mong thorns in the name of the Lord 11 cut them off! 13 1 was pushed hard, so that I was I falling, but the
Lord I helped me. Psalm 118 H The Lord is my strength I and my song he has become my sal- I vation. PRAYER Give thanks to
the Lord, O my soul. Worship Him and trust His mercy and truth for they are as great as He Himself is, and they endure forever.
Let the Lord be Your meditation and Your song in the house of Your pilgrimage because He has given You strength, and has set
before you the hope of eternal life in Jesus Christ. Amen. 1 5 Glad songs of salvation are in the tents of the I righteous: The right
hand of the Lord does I valiantly, 16 the right hand of the I Lord exalts, the right hand of the Lord does I valiantly! 1 7 1 shall not
die, but 11 shall live, and recount the deeds I of the Lord. 18 The Lord has disciplined me se-1 verely, but he has not given me
o-1 ver to death. 19 Open to me the gates of I righteousness, that I may enter through them and give thanks I to the Lord. 20
This is the gate I of the Lord the righteous shall enter I through it. 21 I thank you that you have I answered me and have become
my sal-1 vation. 22 The stone that the builders re-1 jected has become the I cornerstone. 23 This is the Lords I doing it is
marvelous I in our eyes. 24 This is the day that the I Lord has made let us rejoice and be I glad in it. 93 Reading the Psalms with
Luther 25 Save us, we pray, I O Lord! O Lord, we pray, give I us success! 26 Blessed is he who comes in the name I of the Lord!
We bless you from the house I of the Lord. 27 The Lord is God, and he has made his light to shine up-1 on us. Bind the festal
sacrifice with cords, up to the horns of the I altar! 28 You are my God, and I will give I thanks to you you are my God I will ex-1
tol you. 29 Oh give thanks to the Lord, for I he is good for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever! PRAYER Lord Jesus, who bled
and died for our sins, and rose again triumphing over Your and our enemies, grant us to be partakers of Your victory, that we,
delivered from the hand of them that hate us, may serve You without fear in time and eternity. Amen. PSALM 119  he 119th
psalm is a long psalm, containing prayers, comforts, instructions, and thanks in great number. It is chiefly written to make us
excited about Gods Word. It praises Gods Word throughout and warns us against both the false teachers and against boredom
and contempt for the Word. Therefore, it is primarily to be counted among the psalms of comfort. Its primary concern is that we
have Gods Word in its purity and hear it gladly. From this con cern, then, come powerful prayers, instructions, thanks, 94 Psalm
119 prophecies, worship of God, suffering, and all that pleases God and grieves the devil. But where one despises the Word and
is satiated by it, there all these cease. For where the Word is not purely taught, there is truly an abundance of prayers, instructio
ns, comforts, worship, suffering, and propheciesbut totally false and condemned! For it is then only service to the devil, who is
thus impure with all his heretics. //9 ALE PH  Blessed are those whose way is I blameless, who walk in the law I of the Lord! 2
Blessed are those who keep his testi- I monies, who seek him with their I whole heart, 3 who also 1 do no wrong, but walk I in
his ways! 4 You have commanded your I precepts to be kept dil- I igently. 5 Oh that my ways may be I steadfast in keeping your
I statutes! 6 Then I shall not be I put to shame, having my eyes fixed on all your com- I mandraents. 7 1 will praise you with an I
upright heart,  when I learn your just and righ- I teous decrees. 8 1 will keep your I statutes do not utterly for- I sake me! BETH 9
How can a young man keep his I way pure? By guarding it according I to your word. 10 With my whole heart I I seek you let me
not wander from your com- I mandments! Reading the Psalms with Luther n I have stored up your word I in my heart, that I
might not sin a-1 gainst you. 12 Blessed are you, I O Lord teach me your I statutes! ,J With my lips I I declare all the just decrees
I of your mouth. 14 In the way of your testimonies I I delight as much as in all I riches. ,s I will meditate on your I precepts and fix
my eyes I on your ways. 16 I will delight in your I statutes I will not for-1 gel your word. PRAYER Beloved Father in heaven. You
are blessed for granting us the Word of Your grace, in which You have revealed to us Your will concerning our salvation. Teach
us to love Your Word, diligently to hear and willingly to learn it, that guid ed by this lamp our feet may walk in the way everlasting
. Amen. GIMEL 17 Deal bountifully with your I servant, that I may live and I keep your word. ,8 Open my eyes, that 11 may
behold wondrous things out I of your law. 19 I am a sojourner I on the earth hide not your command-1 ments from me! 20 My
soul is consumed with I longing for your just decrees at I all times. 21 You rebuke the insolent, ac-1 cursed ones, who wander
from your com-1 mandments. Psalm 119 22 Take away from me scorn I and contempt, for I have kept your testi-1 monies. 23
Even though princes sit plotting a-1 gainst me, your servant will meditate on your I statutes. 2  Your testimonies are I my delight
they are my I counselors. DALETH 25 My soul clings I to the t@et give me life according I to your word! 26 When I told of my
ways, you I answered me teach me your I statutes! 27 Make me understand the way of your I precepts, and I will meditate on
your I wondrous works. 28 My soul melts away for I sorrow strengthen me according I to your word! 29 Put false ways I far from
me and graciously teach I me your law! 30 1 have chosen the way of I faithfulness I set your just decrees be-1 fore me. 31 I cling
to your testimonies, I O Lord let me not be I put to shame! 32 I will run in the way of your com-1 mandments when you en-1
large my heart! PRAYER Lord, our God, teach us to know and remember how frail we are, that we do not lean on our own
understanding, nor depend on our own wisdom and skill, but seek our true wis dom in Your Word. Let Your statutes enlighten
our eyes, that we behold Your wondrous counsel for the salvation of our souls in Jesus Christ. Amen. Reading the Psalms with
Luther HE 33 Teach me, O Lord, the way of your I statutes and 1 will keep it I to the end. 34 Give me understanding, that I may I
keep your law and observe it with my I whole heart. 35 Lead me in the path of your com- I mandments, for I de- I light in it. 36
Incline my heart to your testi- I monies, and not to I selfish gain! 37 Turn my eyes from looking at I worthless things and give me
life I in your ways. 38 Confirm to your servant your I promise, that you I may be feared. 39 Turn away the reproach I that I dread,
for your just de- I crees are good. 40 Behold, I long for your I precepts in your righteousness I give me life! WAW 41 Let your
steadfast love come to me, IO Lord, your salvation according to your I promise 42 then shall I have an answer for him who I
taunts me, for I trust I in your word. 43 And take not the word of truth utterly out I of my mouth, for my hope is in your I just
decrees. 44 I will keep your law con- I tinually, forever and I ever, 45 and I shall walk in a I wide place, for I have sought your I
precepts. 46 1 will also speak of your testimonies be-1 fore kings and shall not be I put to shame. Psalm 119  7 for 1 find my
delight in your com- I mandments, which I I love. 48 1 will lift up my hands toward your commandments, I which I love/ and 1 will
meditate on your I statutes. PRA YER Lord, our God, who alone is able to cleanse from sin, preserve us from appealing for
righteousness to the testimo ny of our conscience or the innocence of our heart, and teach us to build our hope alone on the
blood and death of Your Son, Jesus Christ. For His sake blot out our sins and remem ber our transgressions no more. Amen.
ZAYIN 49 Remember your word to your I servant, in which you have I made me hope. 50 This is my comfort in my af-1 fliction,
that your promise I gives me life. 51 The insolent utterly de-1 ride me, but I do not tum away I from your law. 52 When I think of
your just decrees I from of old, I take comfort, I O Lord. 53 Hot indignation seizes me because of the I wicked, who for-1 sake
your law. 34 Your statutes have I been my songs in the house of my I sojourning. ss1 remember your name in the night, I O
Lord, and I keep your law. 56 This blessing has fal-1 len to me, that I have kept your I precepts. reading the Psalms with Luther
HETH 57 The Lord is my I portion I promise to I keep your words. 58 1 entreat your favor with I all my heart be gracious to me
according to your I promise. 59 When I think I on my ways, I turn my feet to your testi-1 monies 60 I hasten and do I not delay to
keep your com-1 mandments. 61 Though the cords of the wicked en-1 snare me, I do not for-1 get your law. 62 At midnight I rise
to I praise you, because of your just and righ-1 teous decrees. 63 1 am a companion of all who I fear you, of those who keep
your I precepts. 64 The earth, O Lord, is full of your I steadfast love teach me your I statutes! PRAYER O Lord, You who are the
same yesterday, today, and for ever, remember us pilgrims in this nether world for frail is our frame, and few are our days. Let
the Word of Your sal vation be a lamp to our feet and a light for our path, that our soul must not walk in darkness, but may find
the way to that city whose light is the Lamb. Amen. TETH 65 You have dealt well with your I servant, O Lord, according I to your
word. 66 Teach me good judgment and I knowledge, for 1 believe in your com-1 mandments. 67 Before I was afflicted 11 went
astray, but now 11 keep your word. Psalm 1IV 68 You are good and I do good teach me your I statutes.  The insolent smear I
me with lies, but with my whole heart I keep your I precepts 70 their heart is unfeeling I like fat, but 1 delight I in your law.  It is
good for me that 1 was af- I flicted, that I might learn your I statutes. 72 The law of your mouth is bet-1 ter to me than thousands
of gold and silver I pieces. YODH 73 Your hands have made and I fashioned me give me understanding that I may learn your
com- I mandments. 74 Those who fear you shall see me I and rejoice, because I have hoped I in your word. 75 1 know, O Lord,
that your just decrees are I righteous, and that in faithfulness you have af-1 flicted me. 76 Let your steadfast love I comfort me
according to your promise to your I servant. 77 Let your mercy come to me, that 11 may live for your law is I my delight. 78 Let
the insolent be put to shame, because they have wronged me with I falsehood as for me, I will meditate on your I precepts. 79
Let those who fear you I turn to me, that they may know your testi-1 monies. 80 May my heart be blameless in your I statutes,
that I may not be I put to shame!  29 / Reading the Psalms with Luther PRAYER Thanks be to You, Lord Jesus, Captain of our
salvation, for the goodly weapon of Your Word, with which we drive the enemy before us, and can rout thrones and potentates.
Create in us a zeal for Your Word, willingly to hear and learn it, that we may always have our weapon polished and ready.
Amen. KAPH 81 My soul longs for your sal-1 vation I hope I in your word. 82 My eyes long for your I promise 1 ask, When will
you I comfort me? 83 For I have become like a wineskin I in the smoke, yet I have not forgotten your I statutes. 84 How long
must your ser-1 vant endure? When will you judge those who perse-1 cute me? 85 The insolent have dug pit-1 falls for me they
do not live according I to your law. 86 All your command-1 ments are sure they persecute me with falsehood I help me! 87 They
have almost made an end of me I on earth, but 1 have not forsaken your I precepts. 88 In your steadfast love I give me life, that I
may keep the testimonies I of your mouth. LAMEDH 89 Forever, I O Lord, your word is firmly fixed in the I heavens. 90 Your
faithfulness endures to all gener-1 ations you have established the earth, and it I stands fast. Psalm 119 91 By your appointment
they I stand this day, for all things are your I servants. 92 If your law had not been I my delight, I would have perished in my af- I
fliction. 93 1 will never forget your I precepts,  for by them you have giv- I en me life. 94 1 am yours I save me, for I have sought
your I precepts. 95 The wicked lie in wait to de- I stroy me, but I consider your testi- I monies. 96 1 have seen a limit to all per- I
fection, but your commandment is exceed- I ingly broad. PRAYER Spirit of the living God, teach us to know and to consid er the
vanity of all earthly things, that we may be made truly wise to lay up for ourselves treasures in heaven, that our souls may not be
left empty. Cause Your Word to grow in us, and to bring fruit which will remain unto eternal life. Amen. MEM 97 Oh how 1 I love
your law! It is my meditation I all the day. 98 Your commandment makes me wiser than my I enemies, for it is ever I with me. 99
I have more understanding than all my I teachers, for your testimonies are my medi- I tation. 100 I understand more than the I
ag&d, for I keep your I precepts. 101 I hold back my feet from every I evil way, in order to I keep your word. 93 Reading the
Psalms with Luther 102 1 do noi turn aside from your I just decrees, for you have I taught me. 103 How sweet are your words I
to my taste, sweeter than honey I to my mouth! 104 Through your precepts I get under-1 standing therefore I hate every I false
way. NUN ,os Your word is a lamp I to my feet and a light I to my path. 106 I have sworn an oath and con-1 firmed it, to keep
your just and righ-1 teous decrees. 107 1 am severely af-1 flicted give me life, O Lord, according I to your word! 108 Accept my
freewill offerings of praise, I O Lord, and teach me your I just decrees. 109 1 hold my life in my hand con-1 tinually, but I do not
for-1 get your law. no The wicked have laid a I snare for me, but I do not stray from your I precepts. 111 Your testimonies are my
heritage for-1 ever, for they are the joy I of my heart. 112 1 incline my heart to perform your I statutes forever, I to the end.
PRAYER Thanks be to You, God of all wisdom, that You have given us Your Word, in which You teach us the true wisdom.
Guard us from the seductions of science falsely so called, and keep us in the faith of Your Word, which enlightens the soul unto
eternal life. So draw us to Your Son, that we hear His voice and follow Him. Amen. 94 Psalm 119 SAMEKH 113 1 hate the
double-1 minded, but 11 love your law. You are my hiding place I and my shield I hope I in your word. ns Depart from me, you
evil-1 doers, that I may keep the commandments I of my God. 116 Uphold me according to your promise, that 11 may live, and
let me not be put to shame I in my hope! 117 Hold me up, that 11 may be safe and have regard for your statutes con-1 tinuaUy!
1.8 You spurn all who go astray from your I statutes, for their cunning I is in vain. 1.9 All the wicked of the earth you dis-1 card
like dross, therefore I love your testi-1 monies. 120 My flesh trembles for I fear of you, and I am afraid of your I judgments. AY IN
121 I have done what is I just and right do not leave me to my op-1 pressors. 122 Give your servant a I pledge of good let not
the insolent op-1 press me. 123 My eyes long for your sal-1 vation and for the fulfillment of your righteous I promise. 124 Deal
with your servant according to your I steadfast love, and teach me your I statutes. 125 I am your servant give me under-1
standing, that I may know your testi-1 monies! 126 It is time for the I Lord to act, for your law has been I broken. HEADING THE
PSALMS WITH LUTHER 127 Therefore I love your com-1 mandments above gold, above I fine gold. 128 Therefore 1 consider
all your precepts I to be right I hate every I false way. PRAYER As I pray, dear Jesus, hear me Let Your words in me take root.
May Your Spirit eer be near me That I bear abundant fruit. May I daily sing Your praise. From my heart glad anthems raise. Till
my highest praise is given In the endless joy of heaven. Amen, (lsb 589:4) PE 129 Your testimonies are I wonderful therefore my
soul I keeps them. 130 The unfolding of your I words gives light it imparts understanding to the I simple. 131 I open my I mouth
and pant, because I long for your com-1 mandments. 132 Turn to me and be gra-1 cious to me, as is your way with those who I
love your name. 133 Keep steady my steps according to your I promise, and let no iniquity get dominion I over me. 134 Redeem
me from mans op- I pression, that I may keep your I precepts. 135 Make your face shine upon your I servant, and teach me your
I statutes. 136 My eyes shed I streams of tears, because people do not I keep your law. 96 Psalm 119 TSADHE 137 Righteous
are you, I O Lord, and right are your I just decrees. 138 You have appointed your testimonies in I righteousness and in all I
faithfulness. 139 My zeal con- I sumes me, because my foes for-1 get your words. 140 Your promise is I well tried, and your
servant I loves it. 141 I am small I and despised, yet I do not forget your I precepts. 142 Your righteousness is righteous for-1
ever, and your I law is true. 143 Trouble and anguish have I found me out, but your commandments are I my delight. 144 Your
testimonies are righteous for- I ever give me understanding that 11 may live. PRAYER Praise and honor belong to You, our
God, because You have given us Your Word, by which You clothe our poor and naked souls in the garments of salvation, and
bring to us heavenly and abiding treasures. Fashion our hearts by Your Holy Spirit, that we crave not the things of this earth, but
desire the things above. Amen. QOPH 143 With my whole heart I cry answer me, I O Lord! I will keep your I statutes. 1 48 1 call
to you I save me, that I may observe your testi- I monies. 147 1 rise before dawn and I cry for help 1 hope I in your words. 27
Reading the Psalms with Luther 148 My eyes are awake before the watches I of the night, that I may meditate on your I promise.
149 Hear my voice according to your I steadfast love O Lord, according to your justice I give me life. iso They draw near who
persecute me with evil I purpose they are far I from your law. 1S  But you are near, I O Lord, and all your command-1 ments are
true. 152 Long have I known from your testi-1 monies that you have founded them for-1 ever. RESH 153 Look on my affliction
and de-1 liver me, for I do not for-1 get your law. 154 Plead my cause and re-1 deem me give me life according to your I
promise! ,ss Salvation is far from the I wicked, for they do not seek your I statutes. 156 Great is your mercy, I O Lord give me life
according to your I just decrees. 157 Many are my persecutors and my adver-1 saries, but I do not swerve from your testi-1
monies. 158 1 look at the faithless I with disgust, because they do not keep I your commands. 159 Consider how I love your I
precepts! Give me life according to your I steadfast love. 1 60 The sum of your I word is truth, and every one of your just and
righteous decrees endures for-1 ever. Psalm 119 PRAYER Lord, our God, who has commanded us to pray, grant us that Spirit
of prayer, who alone can teach us how to bring our petitions before You in acceptable manner. Cause Your Spirit to guide us,
that we seek not self-chosen works after our own thoughts, but continue in Your Word that we may be found Your children
indeed. Amen. SIN AND SHIN 161 Princes persecute me with-1 out cause, but my heart stands in awe I of your words. 162 1
rejoice I at your word like one who I finds great spoil. 163 1 hate and abhor I falsehood, but 11 love your law. 164 Seven times a
day 11 praise you for your just and righ-1 teous decrees. 165 Great peace have those who I love your law nothing can make
them I stumble. 166 I hope for your salvation, I O Lord, and 1 do your com-1 mandments. 167 My soul keeps your testi-1 monies
1 love them ex-1 ceedingly. 168 I keep your precepts and testi-1 monies, for all my ways are be-1 fore you. TAW 169 Let my cry
come before you, I O Lord give me understanding according I to your word! 170 Let my plea come be-1 fore you deliver me
according ! to your word. 171 My lips will I pour forth praise, for you teach me your I statutes. 99 Reading the Psalms with Luther
172 My tongue will sing I of your word, for all your command-1 ments are right. 173 Let your hand be ready to I help me, for I
have chosen your I precepts. 174 1 long for your salvation, IO Lord, and your law is I my delight. 175 Let my soul live and I
praise you, and let your just decrees I help me. 176 1 have gone astray like a lost sheep seek your I servant, for I do not forget
your com-1 mandments. PRAYER Lord, You are good and gracious, and most heartily do we thank You that You have granted
us to read and to hear this song in which You commend to us Your heavenly Word. And now prepare a place for it in our hearts,
that it may shine in us as a light, dispelling the night of unbelief and sin, and filling our souls with the love of Jesus, our Savior.
Amen. PSALM 120 r  rie 120th psalm is a psalm of prayer. It laments and cries out against the false teachers who commit
murderous crimes, whose false teachings penetrate like a sharp arrow, powerfully shot. They spread themselves out like fire in a
juniper bush, which bums easily and well, for it is fat and thick and susceptible to fire. In the same way, the people are much,
much more susceptible to false teachings (which har monize well with reason) than to the true teachings, as St. Paul (2 Timothy
4:3) also says about the itching ears. S00 Psalm IZU 420 1 1n my distress I called I to the Lord, and he I answered me. 2 Deliver
me, O Lord, from I lying lips, from a de-1 ceitful tongue. 3 What shall be given to you, and what more shall be I done to you, you
de-1 ceitful tongue? 4 A warriors sharp I arrows, with glowing coals of the I broom tree! 5 Woe to me, that I sojourn in I
Meshech, that I dwell among the tents of I Kedar! 6 Too long have I had my I dwelling among those who I hate peace. 7 11 am
for peace, but when 1 speak, they I are for war! PRAYER O most merciful Father, guard us by Your power that we do not fall
into the snares of slanderers and into the toils of those practicing deceit. Preserve us from soul-destroying errors. Give us
teachers whose hearts are upright with Your Word, and kindle and increase in us the knowledge of Your saving truth, through
Jesus Christ. Amen. SO/ Reading the Psalms with Luther PSALM 111 One 121 st psalm is a psalm of comfort in which the
psalmist comforts us by his example, so that we may remain strong in faith and wait for Gods help and protection. Although it
appears as though He sleeps or slumbers so that we are struck down by the sun by day and the moon at night, yet it is not so,
though we may think and feel it. For God watches and keeps us secure and does not let the sun strike us dead. This we will
come to know for certain at last, though we can now only look forward to it. /2/ 1 I lift up my eyes I to the hills. From where does
my I help come? 2 My help comes I from the Lord, . who made I heaven and earth. 3 He will not let your I foot be moved he who
keeps you will not I slumber. 4 Behold, he who keeps I Israel will neither slum- I ber nor sleep. 5 The Lord is your I keeper the
Lord is your shade on your I right hand. 6 The sun shall not strike I you by day, nor the I moon by night. 7 The Lord will keep you
from all I evil he will I keep your life. 8 The Lord will keep your going out and your I coming in from this time forth and for-1
evermore. PsaJm 122 PR A YHR To You, O God, who has hitherto been our Father and our Patron, do we lift up our eyes,
knowing that from You alone can come our help and our salvation. Grant us a living trust in Your mercy and truth that hearts do
not fear when we must pass through the fire of Inals or must wade through the waters of affliction, but always maintain a
cheerful trust in Your help, through Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALM 122 r e 122nd psalm is a psalm that gives thanks with joy for
the Word of God, which in a specific city, namely Jerusalem, was given through a specific people, namely the Levites and kings,
and received by specific hearers, namely the tribe of Israel. How much is it to be lamented that, seek ing everywhere for Gods
Word and being nowhere able to find it, the children of Israel wound their way to idols? And we Christians did the same with our
running to pilgrimages and winding our way to the cloister. But the Holy Church is our Jerusalem, and Christ is our temple, city,
altar, and mercy seat, to which, from which, and with which we seek and hear His Word. 1 I was glad when they I said to me, Let
us go to the house I of the Lord! 2 Our feet have been I standing within your gates, O Je- I rusalem! SOS Reading the Psalms
with Luther 3 Jerusalembuilt as a I city that is bound firmly to-1 gether, 4 to which the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, as was
decreed for I Israel, to give thanks to the name I of the Lord. 5 There thrones for judg-1 ment were set, the thrones of the house
of I David. 6 Pray for the peace of Je-1 rusalem! "May they be secure who I love you! 7 Peace be with-1 in your walls and
security within your I towers!" 8 For my brothers and com-1 panions sake" I will say, "Peace be with-1 in you!" 9 For the sake of
the house of the I Lord our God, I will I seek your good. PR A YER Our hearts are glad and our souls rejoice before You, Lord,
our God, because by Your Word of truth You have made us members of Your Holy Church, in which You daily and richly forgive
the sins of all those who build their trust on Jesus Christ. Grant us grace to abide in the love of Your Word, in purity of faith and
in piety of life, even to our end. Amen. 304 Psalm 123 g - PSALM 123 123rd psalm is a psalm of prayer against the arrogant and
the proud who despise and scorn Gods Word and His little ones. Not only the nations considered the God and worship of the
children of Israel to be a work of fool ishness, yes, even error and sedition. Even among the Israelites themselves, the worshiper
s of idols and false gods, the false teachers with their multitudes, also arrogant ly and securely despised and scorned the little
land and the true teaching, as Psalm 12 and Psalm 14 above also lament. So also today, our princes and rebellious spirits (who
are as holy as the Gospel itself) in an entirely princely and pious manner despise the poor preacher and the faithful wor shiper of
Christ and tread them underfootto say nothing of what our heathen, the spiritual lords, do, as well as their multitudes. We
therefore are covered everywhere with con tempt. But God is and will be gracious. Amen. 1 To you I lift I up my eyes, O you who
are enthroned in the I heavens! 2 Behold, as the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master, as the eyes of a maidservant
to the hand of her I mistress, so our eyes look to the Lord our God, till he has mercy up-1 on us. 3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord,
have mercy up- I on us/ for we have had more than enough I of contempt. 4 Our soul has had more than enough of the scom of
those who I are at ease/ of the contempt I of the proud. 3&S Reading the Psalms with Luther PRA YER Lord Jesus, seated at
the right hand of Your Father, a Lord over heaven and earth, restrain the enemies of Your Church, and uphold Your faithful
followers. Let not the scorn of the world and the mockery of the proud cause us to fall away from You, but grant us courage to
confess Your name unto our end, and cause the wicked to see Your power and the upright to see Your truth. Amen. PSALM 124
he 124th psalm is a psalm thanking God for pro tecting His poor little band from the ruthless tyrants. He res cues them from the
snares of the poisonous slanderer. These are as many and great as a great, deep water and flood against the little band. But
though their teeth be ever so malevolent and angry, God is greater and knocks their teeth out and breaks the snares and
rescues His own from them, as we still daily experience. 624  If it had not been the Lord who was I on our side let Israel I now
say 2 if it had not been the Lord who was I on our side when people rose up a-1 gainst us, 3 then they would have swallowed us
I up alive, when their anger was kindled a-1 gainst us 4 then the flood would have swept I us away, the torrent would have gone
I over us Psalm 125 5 then over us I would have gone' the raging I waters. 6 Blessed I be the Lord/ who has not given us as
prey I to their teeth! 7 We have escaped like a bird from the snare of the I fowlers " the snare is broken, and we I have escaped!
8 Our help is in the name I of the Lord, who made I heaven and earth. PRAYER Praise belongs to You, Lord God, because You
have so mightily preserved Your Church against her enemies, both visible and invisible, that the very gates of hell could not pre
vail against her. Defend us against all evil, and preserve us and our children in the true knowledge of You and of our Savior
Jesus Christ, whom You have sent, that in Him we may have life. Amen. PSALM 125 'he 125th psalm is a psalm of thanks. It
gives thanks that God will not forever tolerate the power of the ungodly teachers and officials over those who truly believe,
teach, and hope in Him. Therefore, the Christian need not be weary and for that reason fall away from the Word, but He would
give all blessings to those who hope in Him. However, God will cut off and throw out the faithless with their crooked waysthe
master as well as the student. We have seen and experienced this also in our own time among the rebellious spirits. e 907
KhADING THh PSALMS WITH LUTHLR 1 Those who trust in the Lord are like Mount I Zion, which cannot be moved, but abides
for-1 ever. 2 As the mountains surround Jerusalem, so the Lord surrounds his I people, from this lime forth and for- I evermore. J
For the scepter of wickedness shall not rest on the land allotted to the I righteous, lest the righteous stretch out their hands to I
do wrong. 4 Do good, O Lord, to those I who are good, and to those who are upright I in their hearts! 5 But those who turn aside
to their crooked ways the Lord will lead away with evil- 1 doers! Peace be upon I Israel! PR A YER O Lord, who did not forsake
Your people, who protected Zion with an outstretched arm, and defended Jerusalem with a mighty hand, restrain the wicked,
convert the sinners, turn the hearts of our enemies, cover us with the shadow of Your wings, save Your Church in these perilous
times, and always grant us the enjoyment of Your peace in Jesus, our Savior. Amen. Psalm 126 PSALM 126 ne 126ih psalm is
a psalm of thanks for the deliv erance from the captivity in Babylon. Whether it was made following that captivity or prior to it (as
a prophecy for the comfort and hope for the coming deliverance, so that they may not despair) is of no concern. At the end the
psalmist concludes that it happensand always happensto the saints that they first suffer before they can rejoice. Similarly, the
world first rejoices before they get their suf fering. Therefore, the saints sow with tears to reap afterward with joy. But (he says),
such seed is excellent and precious seed to bring forth such a fruit. Before weeping, one cannot see that it is so precious and
worthy before God. But God loves His saints so much that He regards even their death (which is truly the most abominable,
accursed seed of the world) as more precious than all of the worlds treasures and goods. 426 1 When the Lord restored the
fortunes of I Zion, we were like I those who dream. 2 Then our mouth was filled with I laughter, and our tongue with I shouts of
joy then they said among the nations, The Lord has done great 1 things for them. 3 The Lord has done great things for us I we
are glad. 4 Restore our fortunes, I O Lord, like streams in the I Negeb! 309 RhADINC THfc PSAl.MS WITH LlJTHfcR s Those
who I sow in tears 1 ' shall reap with I shouts of joy! 6 He who goes out weeping, bearing the seed for I sowing/ shall come home
with shouts of joy, bringing his I sheaves with him. PRAYKR Merciful Father in heaven, convert the sinners and com fort Your
believers with Your Word and Spirit. Grant us will ing hearts and understanding minds to sow the seed of Your Word broadcast
among men, and if it seems good to hide the fruit of our sowing from our eyes, strengthen our hearts that we faint not, but wait
for the harvest in the world to come, through Jesus Chnst, our Lord. Amen. PSALM 127 he 127th psalm is a psalm of instruction.
It teach es us that worldly authority and household order are noth ing less than Gods gifts and rest only in His hand. For where
He does not give peace and good government, there no wisdom, order, exertion, or armor can hold onto peace. Where He does
not give good fortune, with wife, children, and workers, there all care and work will be for nothing. 627 1 Unless the Lord builds
the house, those who build it la-1 bor in vain. Unless the Lord watches over the city, the watchman stays a-1 wake in vain. 3J0
Psalm 128 2 It is in vain that you rise up early and go late to rest, eating the bread of I anxious toil for he gives to his be- I lov&d
sleep. 3 Behold, children are a heritage I from the Lord, the fruit of the womb I a reward. 4 Like arrows in the hand of a I warrior
are the children I of ones youth. 5 Blessdd is the man who fills his quiver I with them! He shall not be put to shame when he
speaks with his enemies I in the gate. PRAYER For the benefit of man. You, Father of mercies, instituted holy wedlock, and
have promised Your blessing to every house in which dwells Your fear. Yes, even You sit at the fire side of them that love You,
as at Your own hearth and home. Cause Your peace to dwell under our roof, and bless the labors of our hands. Amen. PSALM
128 f he 128th psalm is a psalm of comfort in which the estate of marriage is splendidly praised. Marriage partners are given this
great comfort: they should not look only at the trouble, work, discouragement, and discomfort they feel and experience in
marriage, but rather look at the gracious will of God toward them, that their station and life are a gra cious creation of God and
are blessed by Him. Therefore, marriage is dear to Him, and He gives it much more happi ness and blessing than discomfort, if
one only believes and  9 // Reading the Psalms with Luther adapts oneself to marriage and faithfully remains within it. Thus in
the beginning and middle of the psalm it says, everyone who fears the Lord . .  When the godless go astray, on the other hand, it
is no surprise. 1 Blessed is everyone who I fears the Lord, who walks I in his ways! 2 You shall eat the fruit of the labor I of your
hands you shall be blessed, and it shall be I well with you. 1 Your wife will be like a fruitful vine with-1 in your house your
children will be like olive shoots around your I table. 4 Behold, thus shall the I man be blessed who I fears the Lord. 5 The Lord
bless you from I Zion! May you see the prosperity of Jerusalem all the days I of your life! 6 May you see your childrens I children!
Peace be upon I Israel! PRAYER Thanks be to You, our God, for instituting the holy estate of matrimony and preserving it for so
many ages against the assaults of that apostate spirit which is an enemy of all that is pure and godly. Make every house Your
temple. Fashion the hearts of husband and wife to love children, and cause both parents and children to walk in the faith of Your
Son, and be saved. Amen. 3K2 Psalm 129 PSALM 129 r 129th psalm is a psalm of thanks in which the people of Israel give
thanks for the many delivn8oo2y0Ã…eohem since the beginning. The books of Judges and of Kings show how often they were
oppressed by the nations. They oppressed them severely for a long time and plowed long furrows on their back. They burdened
them with yoke and fetters until God raised up a deliverer for them to free them from their plows, yokes, and ropes. At the end
the psalmist wishes for Israel (that is, prophesies of them) that all their enemies would be dried up and withered, which then was
done. For all those peoples are gone Israel alone remains. Thus all the heathen and enemies of Christ are like the grass on the
roof that sprouts and grows as though it will produce much. But it withers before it is fully developed. It brings no fruit, and there
is no blessing in it. This then is the legacy of the heathen, heretic, and other enemies, that after they rage and storm they
ultimately vanish, leaving neither seed nor mark behind them. The Christians, however, remain forever and ever. /9 1 Greatly
have they afflicted me I from my youth let Israel I now say 2 Greatly have they afflicted me I from my youth, yet they have not
prevailed a-1 gainst me. 3 The plowers plowed up-1 on my back they made long their I furrows. 4 The Lord is I righteous he has
cut the cords of the I wicked. S/r? Reading the Psalms with Luther 5 May all who hate I Zion be put to shame and turned I
backward! 6 Let them be like the grass on the I housetops, which withers before it I grows up, 7 with which the reaper does not I
fill his hand nor the binder of I sheaves his arms, 8 nor do those who pass by say, The blessing of the Lord be up- 1 on you! We
bless you in the name I of the Lord! PRAYER Thanks be to You, Lord Jesus Christ, who has triumphed over Your and our
enemies, and has cut asunder our bonds. Be with us on the day of trial, preserve us in the faith, uphold us in the strife, grant us
the victory, and make us to triumph with all Your saints. Amen. PSALM 130 he 130th psalm is a psalm of prayer that comes from
the genuine Davidic devotion and understanding. It confesses that before God no one is righteous, nor may one become
righteous by his own work and righteousness, but only through grace and forgiveness of sins, which God has promised. The
psalmist comforts himself as he relies on this promise and Word. He exhorts all of Israel that they should do the same and learn
that with God is a throne of grace and redemption. Through Him alone and no way else shall Israel be freed of sins, that is,
through forgiveness" (with out which there is no grace) become righteous and blessed. Apart from this, he truly would be in the
depths and would never stand before God.  3/4 Psalm 130 Look! The true master and doctor of the Holy Scriptures is the one
who understands what this means: The seed of the woman shall tread on the head of the serpent (Genesis 3:15), and through
this seed all the nations of the world shall be blessed (Genesis 12:30). Therefore, the psalmist places both a promise and a
prophecy of Christ in this verse: He will redeem Israel from all his iniquities. Upon this verse, and from it, comes the entire
psalm. /SC? 1 Out I of the depths I cry to you, I O Lord! 2 O Lord, I hear my voice! Let your ears be attentive to the voice of my
pleas for I mercy! 3 If you, O Lord, should mark in-1 iquities, O Lord, I who could stand? 4 But with you there is for-1 giveness,
that you I may be feared. 5 1 wait for the Lord, my I soul waits, and in his I word I hope 6 my soul waits for the Lord more than
watchmen for the I morning, more than watchmen for the I morning. 7 O Israel, hope in the Lord! For with the Lord there is I
steadfast love, and with him is plentiful re-1 demption. 8 And he will redeem I Israel from all his in-1 iquities. S/S Reading the
Psalms with Luther PRAYER God, our Father, who is rich in mercy and with whom ii plenteous forgiveness, remember not the
sins of our youth, nor our transgressions. Blot them out for the sake of Jesus Christ, Your beloved Son, who became the
sacrifice for our sins. For the sake of His crimson blood let our sins be for gotten, and let them be imputed to us no more. Amen. 
7- PSALM 131 r ne 131st psalm is a psalm of instruction. It speaks against the proud, stiff-necked saints who comfort them
selves by placing confidence in their great services of wor ship and their great holiness, and not in the forgiveness of which the
preceding psalm speaks. In contrast to the proud saints, the psalmist is declaring: I cannot travel so high and boast of my
holiness as these people do, who rely on them selves. For whenever I have wanted to do so, not grounding and stilling my heart
on Gods grace (which is what is means to be still), I become like a weaned child. Without the milk of the promise and grace, I cry
day and night and have no peace in my conscience. Therefore, this is the psalmists conclusion: Let Israel and everyone trust
and hope in God and depend only on His grace. Let no one take this sustenance from you. I commend it to you, for the
promised and coming Christ is in it. Note: Luther understood the verse about the weaned child not as a picture of a calm,
contended child (My soul is quiet like a child with its mother), but rather as a picture Psalm 131 of a child deprived of its mothers
breast and therefore dis turbed and upset (If I do not quiet my soul, I am like an upset child in its mothers arms). The only
solutionin either pictureis to nurse on Gods grace. /S/ 1 O Lord, my heart is not lifted up my eyes are not I raised too high I do
not occupy myself with things too great and too marvel-1 ous for me. 2 But I have calmed and quieted my soul, like a weaned
child with its I mother like a weaned child is my soul with-1 in me. 3 O Israel, hope I in the Lord from this time forth and for-1
evermore. PRAYER Lord Jesus, who humbled Yourself to bear our sins in Your own body, and to suffer the shameful death of
the cross, grant us Your Spirit of meekness that we may walk in true humility. Take from us all haughtiness and pride, that we
seek not great things, and create in us that mind by which we count Your grace sufficient unto us. Amen. J/7 Reading the
Psalms with Luther r 132nd psalm is a psalm of prayer in which Solomon, or the people of Israel, pray for the preservation of the
priesthood and the kingdom. That is, they pray for the spiritual and worldly authorities: for Gods Word and tem poral peace. For
where these both stand well, things go well. The psalmist goes on to tell how such a prayer is not only heard, but that God has
promised with an oath to pre serve the kingdom and priesthood in Jerusalem and to dwell there Himself. He will give all blessing
and grace Himself and bring their enemies down to disgrace, so long as they also keep His Commandments and be obedient to
Him. Why, however, he called the place of Gods dwelling Ephrathah and the fields of Jaar is too long to comment on here and
belongs in a commentary. 1 Remember, O Lord, in Davids I favor, all the hardships I he endured, 2 how he swore I to the Lord
and vowed to the Mighty One of I Jacob,  I will not en-1 ter my house or gel in-1 to my bed, 4 1 will not give sleep I to my eyes or
slumber to my I eyelids, 5 until 1 find a place I for the Lord, a dwelling place for the Mighty One of I Jacob. 6 Behold, we heard of
it in I Ephrathah we found it in the I fields of Jaar. 7 Let us go to his I dwelling place let us worship at his I footstool! 3/3 PsaJm
132 8 Anse, O Lord, and go to your I resting place, you and the ark I of your might. 9 Let your priests be clothed with I righteous
ness, and let your saints I shout for joy. 10 For the sake of your servant I David, do not turn away the face of your a-1 nointed
one. 11 The Lord swore to David a sure oath from which he will I not tum back: One of the sons of your body I will set I on your
throne. 12 If your sons keep my covenant and my testimonies that I shall I teach them, their sons also forever shall sit I on your
throne." 13 For the Lord has chosen I Zion he has desired it for his I dwelling place: 14 This is my resting place for-1 ever here I
will dwell, for I have de-1 sired it. 15 1 will abundantly bless her pro-1 visions I will satisfy her I poor with bread. 16 Her priests I
will clothe with sal-1 vation, and her saints will I shout for joy. 17 There I will make a horn to sprout for I David I have prepared a
lamp for my a-1 nointed. 18 His enemies I will I clothe with shame, but on him his I crown will shine " PRAYER You, O Christ,
are worthy to receive honor and praise, because You gather for Yourself a Church out of every kin dred and tongue and nation.
Because You have called us into Your kingdom, make us Your loyal subjects that, dressed in Your livery and justified in the sight
of the Father through Your redemption, we may also walk as Your subjects, glori fying Your name upon earth. Amen. 9/9
Reading the Psalms with Luther C--ne 133rd psalm is a psalm of instruction (in both the spiritual and worldly stations). We
should live together harmoniously as friends, having one teacher, one authority, and that each should carry the burden of the
other. The psalmist gives two comparisons: first, of the anointing oil which flows from Aarons head over his beard and robes
second, of the dew which falls from Ml. Hermon onto Ml. Zion. Where things happen in this way, there God gladly dwells with all
His grace, blessing, and life. But where dis unity and taction prevail, there the devil dwells, and death, and all misfortune. /SS 1
Behold, how good and pleas- I ant it is when brothers dwell in I unity! 2 It is like the precious oil on the head, running down on
the beard, on the beard of I Aaron, running down on the collar I of his robes! 3 It is like the dew of Hermon, which falls on the
mountains of I Zion! For there the Lord has commanded the blessing, life for- I evermore. PRAYER Lord Jesus, You who are our
Peace with the Father, because by Your blood you have reconciled us to Him, grant and preserve peace in Church and State,
and teach us who dwell under the same roof to be of one heart and one mind. Remove from us all envy and strife, and let Your
peace dwell in our hearts that we may live and die in peace. Amen. Psalm 134 r 134ih psalm is a psalm of instruction. It teach es
and admonishes the priests and spiritual ones of their office. They should worship God faithfully and diligently, day and night
praising God. preaching, and occupying them selves with His Word As St. Paul also says to Timothy (2 Timothy 4:21). they
should continue faithfully in their office. They should not concern themselves that people despise the Word and turn from it to
fables. For where one discards Gods Word, there both spiritual and worldly offices will fall as wellat the last, fall into error and
aban doned by God, fall into the devil's power. However, where preaching continues, there He who made heaven and earth is
always present to bless. For the sake of the Word, He helps and gives all blessings even to the unworthy and the unthankful. Let
this psalm be sung by you pastors, preachers, bishops, and whoever sits in a spiri tual office. 1 Come, bless the Lord, all you
servants I of the Lord. who stand by night in the house I of the Lord' 2 Lift up your hands to the I holy place and I bless the Lord! 
May the Lord bless you from I Zion. he who made I heaven and earth! Reading the Psalms with Luther PRAYER Lord Jesus, the
one true Shepherd and Bishop of Your Church, at all times grant true and faithful pastors and teach ers, men eager to perform
all their office. Endow them with the needed gifts to preach Your Word with power, and to make conquest after conquest, to the
glory of Your name and the salvation of many souls. Amen. c/he 135th psalm is a psalm of thanks. It calls the priests to give
thanks, preach, and praise God for the won ders that He showed to the people in Egypt and Canaan, so that they never forget
God and seek idols or other gods. This happens when one does not occupy oneself withand diligently hold topreaching and the
praise of God, as it says in the next psalm. But where His Word is silenced and He does not judge or teach, there truly shall be
great anger and no grace. Therefore think, you servants in the house of the Lord, and preach diligently of God and His works.
/33 1 Praise the Lord! Praise the name I of the Lord, give praise, O servants I ol the Lord, 2 who stand in the house I of the Lord,
in the courts of the house I of our God! 3 Praise the Lord, for the I Lord is good sing to his name, for it is I pleasant! 4 For the
Lord has chosen Jacob I for himself, Israel as his own pos-1 session. 322 Psalm 135 s For 1 know that the I Lord is great, and
that our Lord is a- ! bove all gods. 6 Whatever the Lord pleases, he does, in heaven I and on earth/ in the seas and I all deeps. 7
He it is who makes the clouds rise at the end I of the earth. who makes lightnings for the rain and brings forth the wind from his I
storehouses. 8 He it was who struck down the Firstborn of I Egypt. both of man ! and of beast 9 who in your midst, O I Egypt,
sent signs and wonders against Pharaoh and all his I servants 10 who struck down many I nations and killed I mighty kings, 11
Sihon, king of the Amorites. and Og, king of I Bashan, and all the kingdoms of I Canaan, and gave their land as a I heritage, a
heritage to his people I Israel. n Your name, O Lord, endures for- 1 ever. your renown, O Lord, throughout all I ages. u For the
Lord will vindicate his I people and have compassion on his I servants. is The idols of the nations are sil-1 ver and gold. the work
of I human hands. 16 They have mouths, but I do not speak they have eyes, but I do not see ,7 they have ears, but I do not
hear, nor is there any breath I in their mouths. Those who make them be-1 come like them. so do all who I mist in them! 323
Reading the Psalms with Luther 19 O house of Israel, I bless the Lord! 5  1 O house of Aaron, I bless the Lord! 20 O house of
Levi, I bless the Lord! You who fear the Lord, I bless the Lord! 21 Blessed be the Lord from I Zion, he who dwells in Jerusalem! I
Praise the Lord! HRAYER O Lord, let this Your little flock, Your name alone confessing, Continue in Your loving care. True unity
posessing. Your sacraments, O Lord, And Your saving Word To us. Lord, pure retain. Grant that they may remain Our only
strength and comfort. Help us to serve You evermore With hearts both pure and lowly And may Your Word, that light divine,
Shine on in splendor holy That we repentance show, In faith ever grow The powr of sin destroy And evils that annoy. O make us
faithful Christians, osb 647: 2 .3) Psalm 136 c/he 136th psalm is a psalm of thanks and is perhaps the text to show pnests how
they should sing and preach. Namely, they should sing and preach of God and His won derful deeds, that He is gracious and
merciful and a true Savior. Therefore, in each verse the psalmist repeats the line, His steadfast love endures forever" with which
the psalm is nearly overwhelmed. Truly nothing but grace, not human works or doctrines, should ever be preached. For human
works and words have done no wonders such as these. They are not deserving of this worship, but rather only the grace and
pure goodness of Him who gives all. Gift! Gift, he says! Giftfree of charge! And Christ also stands hidden in the phrase. Such
doctrine keeps in the people a pure faith and a right understanding of grace and the forgiveness of sins, against the rebellious
and stiff-necked work-saints. 1 Give thanks to the Lord, for I he is good. for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever. 2 Give thanks
to the I God of gods, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever. J Give thanks to the I Lord of lords, for his steadfast love endures
for-1 ever  to him who alone does great I wonders. for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 5 to him who by understanding
made the I heavens. for his steadfast love endures for-! ever 6 to him who spread out the earth above the I waters, for his
steadfast love endures for- I ever Reading the Psalms with Luther 7 to him who made the I great lights, for his steadfast love
endures for-1 ever 8 the sun to rule o-1 ver the day, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 9 the moon and stars to rule o-1
ver the night, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 10 to him who struck down the firstborn of I Egypt, for his steadfast love
endures for-1 ever n and brought Israel out from a-1 mong them, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 12 with a strong hand
and an I outstretched arm, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 13 to him who divided the Red I Sea in two, for his steadfast
love endures for-1 ever 14 and made Israel pass through the I midst of it, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 15 but
overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the I Red Sea, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 16 to him who led his people through
the I wilderness, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 17 to him who struck down I great kings, for his steadfast love endures
for-1 ever 18 and killed I mighty kings, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 19 Sihon, king of the I Amorites, for his steadfast
love endures for-1 ever 20 and Og, king of I Bashan, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever 21 and gave their land as a I
heritage, for his steadfast love endures for- I ever, 22 a heritage to Israel his I servant, for his steadfast love endures for- I ever.
23 It is he who remembered us in our I low estate, for his steadfast love endures for-1 ever c 926 Psalm 137 24 and rescued us I
from our foes," for his steadfast love endures for- i ever 2  he who gives food i to all flesh/ for his steadfast love endures for- l
ever. 26 Give thanks to the God of I heaven/ for his steadfast love endures for- I ever. PRAYER My Father, God of mercy and
truth, to Your mercy do 1 look for deliverance from sin and death. Your mercy will 1 plead before Your judgment seat. Your
mercy will 1 sing all the days of my life. Have mercy upon us. and forgive us our transgressions, for the sake of Jesus Christ,
Your Son, our Savior. Amen.  PSALM 137 cJfe 137th psalm is a psalm of prayer in the person of captives in Babylon. It is a
prayer tor Jerusalem, thai is, for Gods Word and spiritual rule that lay completely destroyed for thus it was assumed (with great
reason) especially by those who fear God, as this psalm shows. Although Babylon and Edom greatly rejoiced at this destruction
and mocked those who lamented it. yet they should not thereby escape, unrepentant and blameless, but rather shall be tom to
pieces in return. Their children also shall be dashed on the rocks, and they shall have no descen dants. This indeed happened
to Babylon and shall also hap pen to our Edomites and Babylonians of today, who rejoice, mocking both the poor Church, tom to
pieces, and the destruction of Gods Word and worship But for all that. Israel and Gods Word shall remain forever and ever.
Reading the Psalms with Luther /37 ' By the waters of Babylon, there we sat I down and wept, when we remembered 1 Zion. 2
On the I willows there we hung I up our lyres. 3 For there our captors required of us songs, and our tormentors, mirth, I saying,
Sing us one of the songs of I Zion! 4 How shall we sing the I Lords song in a I foreign land? 5 If I forget you, O Je-1 rusalem, let
my right hand for-1 get its skill! 6 Let my tongue stick to the roof of my mouth, if I do not re-1 member you, if I do not set
Jerusalem above my I highest joy! 7 Remember, O Lord, against the Edomites the day of Je-1 rusalem, how they said, Lay it
bare, lay it bare, down to its foun-1 dations!" 8 O daughter of Babylon, doomed to I be destroyed, blessed shall he be who
repays you with what you have I done to us! 9 Blessed shall he be who takes your I little ones and dashes them a-1 gainst the
rock! PRAYER Lord God of heaven, a just and a holy God, avenge Your Christian Church of her oppressors and mockers.
Restrain the tongues of those who blaspheme Your holy name, and let them not go unpunished who, with the malice of Satan,
go about to corrupt the innocent hearts. Make it publicly known that You are a living God who will not be mocked, and uphold
Your downtrodden Church among so many offenses and tribulations, to the glory of Your name, through Jesus Christ. Amen.
Psalm 138 PSALM UU ne 138th psalm is a general psalm of thanks for a variety of deliverances from the enemies. The psalmist
wishes that Christ's kingdom would come and kings would receive His Word and doctrine, give thanks for it. and wor ship Him
aright. They must learn that Christ's kingdom exists, that it sits on high, and that He helps the lowly who are stuck in woe and
fear, and comforts and rescues sinners and the miserable. The psalm closes with the prayer that God would not abandon His
kingdom and work thus begun, but bring them to fulfillment in eternity. 1 I give you thanks, O Lord, with I my whole heart 4
before the gods 11 sing your praise 2 1 bow down toward your holy temple and give thanks to your name for your steadfast love
and your I faithfulness, for you have exalted above all things your name I and your word. J On the day 1 called, you I answered
me my strength of soul I you increased. 4 All the kings of the earth shall give you thanks, I O Lord, for they have heard the words
I of your mouth, 5 and they shall sing of the ways I of the Lord. for great is the glory I of the Lord. 6 For though the Lord is high,
he regards the I lowly, but the haughty he knows I from afar 7 Though 1 walk in the midst of trouble, you pre-1 serve my life
Reading the Psalms with Luther you stretch out your hand against the wrath of my enemies, and your nght hand de-1 livers me.
8 The Lord will fulfill his pur- I pose for me your steadfast love, O Lord, endures forever. Do not forsake the work I of your hands.
PRAYER Renewed thanks do we return unto You, O Father of mercy, for all Your loving-kindness toward us and chiefly,
because You have called us into the kingdom of Your Son, our Savior. Cleanse us from sin by His blood, and remember not our
transgressions against us. Do not forsake the work of Your own hands that, delivered from our enemies, we may evermore
praise You. Amen. PSALM 139 r 139th psalm is a psalm of thanks that prais es God that He has provided for them so wonderfull
y and still reigns in all of His works, words, and thoughts. Whether the psalmist stands, walks, sleeps, or wakes yes, even in his
mothers womb, before he was made God has been with him as he was being formed and will be with him as long as he lives. It
is as if the psalmist should say: Every human abil ity or powerhow we live, what we do, speak, think, wherever and whenever,
from where we come and to where we should goit is all clearly Gods work and art. What then do the abominable ungodly do,
those who do not believe this but want to make themselves pious 3J0 Psalm 139 through their vexatious work? They want to
have done what they do and then want to receive worship, honor, and glory from God on account of it. But they do not create so
much as one word by themselves, indeed cannot create one thought by their own power Moreover, they do not under stand
what they do. how they are created, how they live, speak, and think Because all that we are and do are God's work and powers,
how can they consider it to be their own noble work to make themselves godly, praise their free will, and deliver themselves from
sin and death? Such people cannot nghtly speak about God and His wori. Protect us from this, O God, and bless my heart, so
that 1 may remain in the true way that stands forever. 1 O Lord, you have searched me and I known me! 2 You know' when I sit
down and when I rise up: you discern my thoughts I from alar. 1 You search out my path and my I lying down and are acquainte
d with I all my ways. 4 Even before a word is I on my tongue. behold. O Lord, you know it alto- I gether. 5 You hem me in,
behind I and before, and lay your hand up- I on me 6 Such knowledge is too wonder-1 ful for me it is high 1 cannot I attain it. 7
Where shall I go from your I Spirit? Or where shall 1 flee from your I presence 8 If 1 ascend to heaven. I you are there! If I make
my bed in Sheol. I you are there' 9 If I take the wings of the I morning and dwell in the uttermost parts I of the sea. to even there
your hand shall I lead me. and your right hand shall I hold me r9r9/ READING THE PSALMS WITH LUTHER 11 If 1 say, Surely
the darkness shall I cover me, and the light about me I be night, 12 even the darkness is not I dark to you the night is bright as
the day, for darkness is as I light with you. 13 For you formed my I inward parts you knitted me together in my I mothers womb.
PRAYER To You, O God, belong praise and glory for Your won derful providence, that You are present with all Your crea tures,
and preserve them in their being. Teach us to remem ber at all times and all places that Your eyes are upon us, and that all our
deeds are recorded in Your book. Blot out the sins that are past with the blood of Christ, and cause us to walk in Your fear, and
to avoid sin. Amen. 14 1 praise you, for I am fearfully and wonder- I fully made. Wonderful are your works my soul knows it I
very well. 15 My frame was not hid-1 den from you, when I was being made in secret, intricately woven in the depths I of the
earth. ,6 Your eyes saw my unformed substance in your book were written, every I one of them, the days that were formed for
me, when as yet there were I none of them. 17 How precious to me are your thoughts. I O God! How vast is the I sum of them!
18 If I would count them, they are more I than the sand. I awake, and I am still I with you.  9 Oh that you would slay the wicked, I
O God! O men of blood, de-1 part from me! Psalm 140 20 They speak against you with mail-1 cious intent your enemies take
your I name in vain! 21 Do I not hate those who hate you, I O Lord? And do 1 not loathe those who nse up a- I gainst you? 22 1
hate them with complete I hatred 1 count them my I enemies. 23 Search me. O God, and I know my heart! Try me and I know
my thoughts! 24 And see if there be any gnevous I way in me, and lead me in the way ever-1 lasting! PRAYER How excellent, O
Lord, have Your thoughts been toward us, in that You made us after Your image. And when we were lost in sin. You sent Your
Son to redeem us, and granted Your Spirit to renew us unto righteousness and true holiness. Thanks be to Your mercy, now
and forever. Amen. PSALM 140 te 140th psalm is a psalm of prayer against the proud, wicked saints who place many traps and
annoyances in the right way, against Gods Word. They threaten and rage against all those who do not praise and follow their
errors. The psalm prays that their plans may not succeed but rather may fall on their own head and that it will happen to them as
to Pharaoh in the Red Sea, that the storm may hurl them into the sea and they may be drowned. Thus may such evil mouths be
silenced and the believers remain before God forever. ms Reading the Psalms with Luther 1 Deliver me, O Lord, from I evil men
preserve me from I violent men, 2 who plan evil things I in their heart and stir up wars con-1 tinually. 3 They make their tongue
sharp as a I serpents, and under their lips is the ven-1 om of asps. 4 Guard me, O Lord, from the hands of the wicked preserve
me from I violent men, who have planned to trip I up my feet. 5 The arrogant have hidden a trap for me, and with cords they
have I spread a net beside the way they have set I snares for me. 6 I say to the Lord, You I are my God give ear to the voice of
my pleas for mercy, I O Lord! 7 O Lord, my Lord, the strength of my sal-1 vation, you have covered my head in the day of I
battle. 8 Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the I wicked do not further their evil plot or they will be ex-1 alted! 9 As for the head of
those who sur-1 round me, let the mischief of their lips over-1 whelm them! 10 Let burning coals fall up-1 on them! Let them be
cast into fire, into miry pits, no I more to rise! 11 Let not the slanderer be established I in the land let evil hunt down the violent
man I speedily! 12 1 know that the Lord will maintain the cause of the af-1 flicted, and will execute justice for the I needy. n
Surely the righteous shall give thanks I to your name the upright shall dwell in your I presence. rsuini i hi PRAYER O Lord, God
of strength, bring to naught the counsels of Your enemies, and frustrate their wicked designs. TUm the hearts of our enemies
that they may cease their hatred against us, and create in us peaceable hearts that do not cher ish hate and do not seek
revenge, but crave peace with all men and strive to follow those things which make for peace, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
Amen. PSALM 141 r 141st psalm is a psalm of prayer. The psalmist prays that he may be preserved from the ungodly teachers,
who appear to be friendly and speak with smooth words when threats do not work. It is better for me (he says) that righteous
teachers rebuke me and condemn my righteous ness, than that the godless praise me. And if, in the meantime, evil comes upon
me and I suf fer cross and death and 1 am uprooted and tom apart, still it is better for me to trust in the Lord. Their hypocrisy will
finally break their neck on a rock, that is, be suddenly over thrown and come to an evil end. Then they will see how bitter is their
sweet teaching and how precious is my sour doctrine. Their own doctrine, in which they are caught as in a net, will bring them
down, while 1 pass by in safety. READING THE PSALMS WITH LlTHfcR / 4 / 1 O Lord, I call upon you hasten I to me! Give ear
to my voice when 1 I call to you! 2 Let my prayer be counted as incense be-1 fore you, and the lifting up of my hands as the
evening I sacrifice! i Set a guard, O Lord, over I my mouth 1  keep watch over the door I of my lips! 4 Do not let my heart incline
to any evil, to busy myself with wicked deeds in company with men who work in- i iquity, r and let me not eat of their del- I
icacies! s Let a righteous man strike me it is a kindness let him rebuke meit is oil for my head let my head not re- I fuse it." Yet
my prayer is continually against their I evil deeds. 6 When their judges are thrown o- I ver the cliff, then they shall hear my
words, for they are 1 pleasant. 7 As when one plows and breaks I up the earth, so shall our bones be scattered at the mouth I of
Sheol. 8 But my eyes are toward you, O I God, my Lord in you 1 seek refuge leave me not de- I fenseless! 9 Keep me from the
trap that they have I laid tor me and from the snares of evil- I doers! 10 Let the wicked fall into their I own nets/ while I pass by I
safely. r?r?6 HRAYt.K Lord. God ot Israel, tn Your temple of old Your people according lo Your Law brought the offering ol a
lamb morn ings and evenings, and this was well pleasing to You when it was offered as a figure of that Lamb which should come
to save Israel from sin For the sake of this Lamb, even Jesus Christ, let our sacrifice be acceptable in Your sight, when night and
morning we cry for the remission of all our sins Amen. C/ne 142nd psalm is a psalm of prayer, as ol one imprisoned under the
false teachers who lorcetully push them away from the true tailh and life. For among the peo ple of Israel it was a constant,
commonplace occurrence that the true prophets were persecuted and condemned on account of true worship and the Word ol
God All their his tories show this, and Christ and St. Stephen also bear wit ness to it (Matthew 5:12 23:34 Acts 7:52) Therefore, it
is no wonder that so many psalms are w ntten against the lalse prophets and teachers because it so commonly happened It has
happened in the Church also since the beginning and always happens, so that one may well indeed pray to God that He would
deliver us from false teachers and from enor. The history of the time ot Elijah. King Ahab. and Jezebel serves as an example tor
these psalms, that all prophets must hide themselves, crawl away. Also in the time ot Anus all orthodox bishops had to flee into
exile For the devil will not tolerate Gods Word and His servants. t2 0 T Reading the Psalms with Luther /? 1 With my voice l cry
out I to the Lord with my voice I plead for mercy I to the Lord. 2 1 pour out my complaint be-1 fore him I tell my trouble be-1 fore
him. 3 When my spirit faints within me, you I know my way! In the path where I walk they have hidden a I trap for me. 4 Look to
the right and see: there is none who takes notice I of me no refuge remains to me no one cares I for my soul. 5 1 cry to you, I O
Lord I say, You are my refuge, my portion in the land of the I living. 6 Attend to my cry, for I am brought I very low! Deliver me
from my persecutors, for they are too I strong for me! 7 Bring me out of prison, that I may give thanks I to your name! The
righteous will surround me, for you will deal bountifully I with me. PRAYER Preserve, O Lord, Your Zion. Bought dearly with Your
blood Protect what You have chosen Against the hellish flood. Be always our defender When dangers gather round When all the
earth is crumbling. Safe may Your Church be found. lsa 3 333 Psalm 143 PSALM 143 le 143rd psalm is a psalm of prayer The
psalmisi prays lor grace and forgiveness of sins, in the terror of his conscience. He is nearly pressed to despair by the enemies
ol faith, that is. the promoters of the Lave These especially plague the distressed and timid conscience and drive it into
darkness, that is. into despair and death with heavy burdens and unbearable doctrine of works, which they do not so much as
touch with one ograce provides deliver ance, not the judgment before which no one alive can stand Of this all the ancient
histones and works of the Lord also give w itness. For all of the holy patriarchs of old placed their hope on God's love and grace,
not on the judgment As St Peter also says (Acts 15:10). Now then, why do you try to test God by putting on the necks of the
disciples a yoke that neither we nor our fathers have been able to bear? No! We believe it is through the grace of our Lord Jesus
that we are saved, just as they are." I consider their works and examples of old (he says here), and 1 am comforted, for they
were comforted and delivered from sin purely from grace, just as I am. Even Abraham himself was called from out of idolatry
(Joshua 24:2). No praise of human righteousness or holiness has an value here at all. no matter how much the false prophets
worry us. Reading the Psalms with Luther /43 1 Hear my prayer, O Lord give ear to my pleas for I mercy! In your faithfulness
answer me, in your I righteousness! 2 Enter not into judgment with your I servant for no one living is righteous be-1 fore you. 3
For the enemy has pursued my soul he has crushed my life I to the ground he has made me sit in darkness like I those long
dead. 4 Therefore my spirit faints with-1 in me my heart within me I is appalled. 5 1 remember the days of old I meditate on all
that I you have done I ponder the work I of your hands. 6 1 stretch out my I hands to you my soul thirsts for you like a I parched
land. 7 Answer me quickly, O Lord! My I spirit fails! Hide not your face from me, lest I be like those who go down I to the pit. 8
Let me hear in the morning of your steadfast love, for in I you I trust. Make me know the way I should go, for to you I lift I up my
soul. 9 Deliver me from my enemies, I O Lord! I have fled to you for I refuge! 10 Teach me to do your will, for you I are my God!
Let your good Spirit lead me on I level ground! 11 For your names sake, O Lord, pre-1 serve my life! In your righteousness bring
my soul out of I trouble! 346 ? And in your steadfast love you will cut oft my i enemies. 1 and you will destroy all the adversaries
of my soul, for 1 am your I servant. PRAYER By Your grace, O God. grant us the forgiveness of all our sins. And by Your Holy
Spirit enlighten our eyes to see both our own sinfulness and the holiness of Your Law. that our trust may not stand in the
righteousness of works, but in Your grace which You have promised in Your Son. Jesus Christ, who gave Himself for us to
sanctify and cleanse us. Amen PSALM 144 c 144th psalm is a psalm of thanks for kings and those in authority. David, a king
who has to wage war and rule, gives thanks to God with this psalm. He confesses that victory, good fortune, and successwhethe
r in conflict or in governmentare gifts of God and do not come from human power and ability. Little does human wisdom know
how to keep subjects under authority and to rule land and people well. For how should he be capable of these great things when
he is nothing and passes away like a shadow ? Instead, the Lord does this. He sends for the lightning sending discouraged and
frightened hearts to the army and humble hearts among the people. Where He thus touches the mountains and the multitudes,
so that they are in fear before Him, there it is good to Fight and rule, for there vic tory and good fortune followas well as this tear.
Yet how' can one, being only flesh and blood, bring about this fear ? J4t/ Reading the Psalms with Luther Then he prays against
his own people and rebukes their foolishness. For the people of Israel, having the renown of being the people ol God, were
nevertheless proud, stiff, necked, disobedient, rebellious, covetous, jealous, and faithless, as indeed they showed by their
opposition to Moses, David, and other kings. And though they saw that David tought and ruled with miraculous wonders, as did
Moses, yet they were no better and did not inquire about God or faith in God. What God? What faith? As long as we have
beautiful children, houses, cattle, many possessions, and enjoyable days, we are a blessed people. And, in addition, we have
prophets enough, who teach us that Gods people are those lor whom things go well. Those for whom things go badly are not of
God." However, things do go badly for all the saintsfor the reason that they trust in God. You have now rescued me, David says,
from the mur derous sword of Goliath. You have given me victory over other kings. Therefore, preserve me also from this
ungodly, evil, false people, who listen to neither God nor man. They are peasants and brutes, yes, truly swine, who are con
cerned for nothing but their own belly. It is harder and more dangerous to rule over them than to continually be at war. He calls
them foreign children, for they want to be the foremost children of God, yet they are foreigners, strangers, and worse than
heathen. They praise God with their mouths, while their heart is far from Him. 1 Blessed be the I Lord, my rock, who trains my
hands for war, and my fingers for I battle 2 he is my steadfast love and my fortress, my stronghold and my de-1 liverer, 342
Psalm 144 my shield and he in whom 1 lake refuge, who subdues peoples I under me j O Lord, whai is man thai you re-1 gard
him.' or ihe son of man that you I think of him 4 Man is l like a breath his days are like a passing I shadow. 3 Bow your heavens,
O Lord, and I come down! Touch the mountains so I that they smoke! 6 Flash forth the lightning and I scatter them' send out
your arrows and I rout them! 7 Stretch out your hand I from on high. rescue me and deliver me from the many waters, from the
hand of I foreigners.  whose mouths i speak lies' and whose right hand is a right hand ot i falsehood. 9 1 will sing a new song to
you. I O God upon a ten-stnnged harp 1 will I play to you, 10 who gives victo-1 ry to kings, who rescues David his servant from
the l cruel sword. 11 Rescue me and deliver me from the hand of I foreigners. whose mouths speak lies and whose nghi hand is
a right hand of I falsehood. 12 May our sons in their youth be like I plants full grown, our daughters like comer pillars cut for the
structure of a I palace u may our granaries be full, providing all kinds of I produce, may our sheep bring forth thousands and ten
thousands I in our fields Reading the Psalms with Luther 14 may our cattle be heavy with young, suffering no mishap or failure in
I bearing may there be no cry of distress I in our streets! 15 Blessed are the people to whom such I blessings fall! Blessed are
the people whose God I is the Lord! PR AYER To You, O Lord, do we owe thanks, because You have granted our country a
peaceful form of government. Preserve civil and religious liberty unto us and our children, and teach us to walk before You in
true faith and singleness of heart that we be found loyal citizens, both of our republic and of the kingdom of Your Son, Jesus
Christ. Amen. PSALM 145 le 145th psalm is a psalm of thanks for the king dom of Christ, which was to come. It strongly urges
the high, exalted work of praising God and glorifying His power and kingdom. For Christ's kingdom and power are hidden under
the cross. If the cross were not extolled through preaching, teaching, and confession, who could have ever thought of it, to say
nothing of knowing it? But such is His kingdom and power, that He aided the fallen, called the needy to Himself, made sinners
godly, and brought the dead to life. Yes, He is the one who gives food to all, who hears the call of His saints, does what they
desire, and protects them. 344 1 I will extol you, my I God and King, and bless your name forever and I ever. 2 Every day I will I
bless you and praise your name forever and I ever. s Great is the Lord, and greatly I to be praised, and his greatness is un- I
searchable. 4 One generation shall commend your works to an- I other, and shall declare your I mighty acts. s On the glorious
splendor of your I majesty, and on your wondrous works, I will I meditate. 6 They shall speak of the might of your I awesome
deeds,  and I will declare your I greatness. 7 They shall pour forth the fame of your abundant I goodness  and shall sing aloud of
your I righteousness. 8 The Lord is gracious and I merciful, slow to anger and abounding in I steadfast love. 9 The Lord is I good
to all, and his mercy is over all that I he has made. PRAYER Praise to the Lord! O let all that is in me adore Him! All that has life
and breath, come now with praises before Him! Let the Amen Sound from His people again Gladly forever adore Him! lstwmj
Reading the Psalms with Luther 10 All your works shall give thanks to you, I O Lord, and all your saints shall I bless you! 1  They
shall speak of the glory of your I kingdom and tell I of your power, 12 to make known to the children of man your I mighty deeds,
5 " and the glorious splendor of your I kingdom. ,3 Your kingdom is an everlasting I kingdom, and your dominion endures
throughout all gener-1 ations. The Lord is faithful in I all his words" and kind in I all his works. H The Lord upholds all who are I
falling and raises up all who are I bowed down. 15 The eyes of all I look to you, and you give them their food in due I season. 16
You open I your hand you satisfy the desire of every I living thing. 17 The Lord is righteous in I all his ways and kind in I all his
works. 18 The Lord is near to all who I call on him, to all who call on I him in truth. 19 He fulfills the desire of those who I fear him
he also hears their cry and I saves them. 20 The Lord preserves all who I love him, but all the wicked he I will destroy. 21 My
mouth will speak the praise I of the Lord, and let all flesh bless his holy name forever and I ever. C 946 PRAYtR Lord Jesus. my
sahation, My light, my life divine. My only consolation. O make me wholly Thine! For Thou hast dearly bought me With blood and
bitter pain Let me, since Thou hast sought me. Eternal life obtain. LSBM't.z PSALM 146 c  /ne 146th psalm is a psalm of thanks.
It teaches at the same lime that one should trust in God and not in princes, as the abominable world, flesh, and blood do For
God is the only one who can truly help in all kind of need, and He helps so that it can really be called being helped. Human help
is so uncertain and does not last. For we our selves do not know the length of our life. /46 1 Praise I the Lord! Praise the Lord, I
O my soul!  I will praise the Lord as long I as I live I will sing praises to my God while 1 have my I being. 1 Put not your trust in I
princes, in a son of man. in whom there is no sal-1 vation 4 When his breath depans he returns I to the earth on that very day his
plans I perish. s Blessfcd is he whose help is the God of I Jacob. whose hope is in the I Lord his God. Reading the Psalms with
Luther 6 who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is I in them/ who keeps faith for- I ever 7 who executes justice for I
the oppressed, who gives food to the I hungry. The Lord sets the prisoners free  the Lord opens the eyes I of the blind. The Lord
lifts up those who are bowed down the Lord loves the I righteous. 9 The Lord watches over the sojourners he upholds the widow
and the I fatherless, but the way of the wicked he brings to I ruin.  The Lord will reign for- 1 ever, your God, O Zion, to all
generations. I Praise the Lord! PR AYLR Many times have You, O Lord, our God, been our help in the time of need. Many limes
You have guarded us in danger and kept us from evil. Thanks and praise to You for Your merciful kindness. Withdraw not Your
hand from us because of our sms, but remember Your great mercy, and let Your grace and help be with us at all times, through
Jesus Christ. Amen. PSALM 147 ie 147th psalm is a psalm of thanks tor various kindnesses and mighty works of Godfirst,
toward Israel and Jerusalem, then to all who thirst. He gives rain and water to all creatures and does not let the least little bird go
hungry, even the most useless raven. How much more then rsaim 14/ shall He care tor us. especially those who trust in His
good ness and not in human strength or horses? But above all. to Jerusalem, sphere His Word and His dwelling are. He gives
peace, grain, and all they need. For Jerusalem and Israel have the advantage that they have Gods Word and worship before all
the nations, therefore. He has done more miracles from them. He will also be much more recognized there in the daily wonders
such as rain, snow, ice, than by the faith less who do not have Gods Word or do not heed it. These people cannot see any work
or wonder of God. though they enjoy them daily with their five senses, root in them, and devour them like swine They did not
know God because they do not hear or pay attention to His Word ' Praise the Lord! For it is good to sing praises I to our God for
it is pleasant, and a song of praise is I fitting 2 The Lord builds up Je-1 rusalem he gathers the outcasts of I Israel. 3 He heals
the broken- 1 hearted and binds I up their wounds.  He determines the number I of the stars: he gives to all of I them their
names. s Great is our Lord, and abun-1 darn in power his understanding is beyond I measure. 6 The Lord lifts up the I humble
he casts the wicked I to the ground 7 Sing to the Lord with thanks-1 giving" make melody to our God I on the lyre'  He covers the
heavens with clouds he prepares rain I for the earth  he makes grass grow I on the hills 49 Reading the Psalms with Luther 9 He
gives to the I beasts their food, and to the young ravens I that cry. 10 His delight is not in the strength I of the horse, nor his
pleasure in the legs I of a man, 11 but the Lord takes pleasure in those who I fear him, in those who hope in his I steadfast love.
12 Praise the Lord, O Je- I rusalem! Praise your God, O I Zion! 13 For he strengthens the bars I of your gates he blesses your
children with-! in you. 14 He makes peace in your I borders he fills you with the finest I of the wheat. 15 He sends out his
command I to the earth his word runs I swiftly. 16 He gives I snow like wool he scatters hoarfrost like I ashes. 17 He hurls down
his crystals of I ice like crumbs who can stand be-1 fore his cold? 18 He sends out his word, and I melts them he makes his wind
blow and the I waters flow. 19 He declares his word to I Jacob, his statutes and just decrees to I Israel. 20 He has not dealt thus
with any other I nation they do not know his just decrees. I Praise the Lord! PRAYER You, O Lord, our merciful and gracious
Father, who has given unto us the knowledge of Your free grace in Jesus Christ, grant us grateful hearts which daily offer to You
the true sacrifices of thanksgiving and praise, and graciously accept our sacrifices, for the sake of Jesus Christ, Your Son.
Amen. 3J0 r- PSALM 148 cne 148th psalm is a psalm of thanks that excites and exhorts all creatures in heaven and earth to
praise God especially His saints, the children of Israel, who worship Him, that is. have His Word and worship. And note that this
psalm confirms all the stations of lifekings, judges, old. young. All are created by God and are good and honorable For if the
office of king or of judge were evil and not God- given, one could not in such an office praise God. But where there are kings and
judges, there will also be subjects, ser vants, hangmen, soldiers, laborers, farmers, townspeople where there are young and old,
there will be married people, children, and household servants. All are honorable and good and show that their Creator is good.
Rightfully, all of creation should be nothing but a tongue, always praising this great goodness of God. If you want to know how
good a thing is. then take whatever you will and say: If there were no fire ..  or If there were no sun . . If there were no hangman .
. If there were no woman . . and so on. Then you will see why one should thank God.  Praise the Lord! Praise the Lord from the I
heavens 1  praise him I in the heights! 2 Praise him. all his I angels praise him. I all his hosts! 3 Praise him, I sun and moon,
praise him. all you I shining stars! 4 Praise him. you highest I heavens. and you waters above the I heavens! Reading the
Psalms with Luther s Let them praise the name i of the Lord!" 1 For he commanded and they were ere-1 ated. 6 And he
established them forever and I ever he gave a decree, and it shall not I pass away. 7 Praise the Lord I from the earth, you great
sea creatures and I all deeps, 8 fire and hail. I snow and mist, stormy wind fulfill-1 ing his word! 9 Mountains and I all hills, fruit
trees and all t cedars! 10 Beasts and all I livestock, creeping things and I Hying birds! 11 Kings of the earth and all I peoples,
princes and all rulers 1 of the earth! 12 Young men and maidens to-1 gether,' old men and I children! 13 Let them praise the
name of the Lord, for his name alone is ex-1 ailed, his majesty is above earth and  heaven. m He has raised up a horn for his
people, praise for I all his saints, for the people of Israel who are near to him. 1 Praise the Lord! PR A YPR Praise the Almighty,
my soul, adore Him! Yes. 1 will laud Him until death With songs and anthems I come before Him As long as He allows me
breath. From Him my life and all things came. Bless. O my soul. His holy name. Alleluia, alleluia! Trust not in rulers, they are but
mortal. Earthbom they are and soon decay. Vain are their counsels at lifes last portal. W hen the dark grave engulfs its prey.
Since mortals can no help afford. Place all your trust in Christ, our Lord. Alleluia, alleluia! ilsbw .2 j - PS AIM 149 r 149th psalm is
a psalm of thanks for the bless ing that God is gracious and merciful to His people, that they know they have a gracious God.
and that they nghtly should rejoice. They have this blessing or grace which is nghtly called the forgiveness of sinsthat God will
not avenge how' evil and sinful they are. Therefore, this psalm in reality belongs in the New Testament. It calls itsel! a new song
to sing to the King of Zion, whom they should praise on their couches, that is, in the church where they come together. (Similarly
, Isaiah called the churches and altars, in which Israel committed fornicationthat is, idolatry  couches or beds.) 3J3 KEADING
THE PSALMS WITH LUTHER Again, it belongs to the New Testament to have a sharp sword in hand to punish the heathen, to
throw kings in stock and dungeons, and to take vengeance, as it is written. This is the vengeance that is spoken of in the
Scriptures, that Abrahams seed should strike down idolatry in all the world through the Gospel, the spiritual sword, taking
prisoner all the holiness of the kings and the wise and subject them to Christ, as Paul says in 2 Corinthians 10:5. /49 1 Praise
the Lord! Sing to the Lord a I new song, his praise in the assembly of the I godly! 2 Let Israel be glad in his I Maker let the
children of Zion rejoice I in their King! 3 Let them praise his name with ! dancing, making melody to him with tambou- I nne and
lyre! 4 For the Lord takes pleasure in his I people he adorns the humble with sal- I vation. 5 Let the godly exult in I glory let them
sing for joy I on their beds. 6 Let the high praises of God be I in their throats and two-edged swords I in their hands, 7 to execute
vengeance on the I nations  and punishments on the I peoples, 8 to bind their I kings with chains and their nobles with fet- I ters
of iron, 9 to execute on them the judgment I written! This is honor for all his godly ones. I Praise the Lord! PR A YLR Praise,
honor, and thanksgiving to You, O Chnsi, King of glory, because by suffering and death and the shedding of Your blood You
redeemed us from the kingdom of darkness, and made us partakers of Your victory over Satan, sin, and death. Grant us a
cheerful faith to sing of Your grace with heart and soul and to make known Your salvation among men Amen ,Jl  PSALM 150
c/he 150th psalm is a psalm of thanks written first of all for the people of Israel to praise God For them His sanctuarythe
firmament of His might, that is. His dwelling place, heaven, and castlewas in Jerusalem. Here also He showed His might with
miracles and received the string music and the songs of the Jews, with which their praise and worship was accompanied. But for
the Christian, preaching and the Gospel are our siring music and worship. Note that all psalms of thanks are nothing but
promises for the poor, troubled conscience, saying as much as this: God is gracious and gladly forgives all sins and will give all
comfort, so that we may find all blessings and comfort in Him. Therefore, this is openly a psalm of thanks and. at the same time,
secretly a psalm of comfortyes, even a psalm of instruction and a prophecy. All in one. it proclaims God s grace and teaches us
to trust and believe in Him. To this, may the same merciful God help usour King and Lord. Jesus Christ, who with the Father and
the Holy Spirit is praised forever. Amen. Reading the Psalms with Luther ' Praise the Lord! Praise God in his sanctu- 1 ary praise
him in his mighty I heavens! 2 Praise him for his I mighty deeds praise him according to his excellent I greatness! 3 Praise him
with I trumpet sound praise him with I lute and harp! 4 Praise him with tambou-1 rine and dance praise him with I strings and
pipe! 5 Praise him with sounding I cymbals praise him with loud clashing I cymbals! 6 Let everything that has breath I praise the
Lord! Praise I the Lord! PRAYER Lord, our God, we yield to You most hearty thanks for this Book of Psalms You gave us by
Your servant David. Grant that the reading of them may not have been in vain. Let it make a lasting impression on our hearts,
that we may be strengthened in faith, and settled in our hope. Keep us steadfast in Jesus Christ until we enter into the inheritanc
e of the saints in light. Amen. Dear name! The rock on which I build, My shield and hiding place My never-failing treasury filled
With boundless stores of grace. O Jesus, shepherd, guardian, friend, My Prophet, Priest, and King. My Lord, my life, my way,
my end. Accept the praise I bring. Amen, ilsbs24 ?. 4) 336 of the Psalms j (Some psalms may be in two or more categories): 1.
Wisdom psalms: 1, 19:8-15, 34, 37, 49, 73, 78, 111, 112, 119. 127, 128, 133, and 139. 2. Messianic/Royal psalms: 2. 20, 21, 45,
72, 89, 101, 110, 132, 144, and enthronement psalms: 47, 93, and 96-99. 3. Individual Laments: 3-7, 10-14, 16. 17, 22, 23,
25-28, 31, 35, 36, 383, 51-59, 61-64. 69, 71, 73, 86, 88, 102, 109. and 130. 4. Community Laments: 44, 60, 74, 77, 79, 80, 83,
85, 89, 90.94, 123, 126, 129, and 137. 5. Imprecatory psalms: 35, 69, 79, and 109. 6. Individual psalms of praise: 9, 18.
30-32,40, 66, 92. 116, and 138. 7. Psalms of trust: 23, 27, 62, 63, 71, and 131. 8. Community psalms of praise: 106, 124, and
129. 9. Hymns/psalms of descriptive praise: 8, 19, 29. 33, 57. 65, 66, 89, 100, 103, 104, 111, 113. 117, 134-136, 139, and
145-150. 10. Psalms of creation: 8, 19, 104, and 139. 11. Psalms of Zion: 46, 48, 76, 84, and 87. 12. Liturgical psalms: 24, 66,
107. 118, 121, 122. Psalms 120-134 are Songs of Ascent to the temple for Feast of Weeks. The Hallel psalms (113-118) were
sung at the Passover meal and at other major festivals. Reading the Psalms with Luther Psalms for the Daily Office ODD AND
EVEN WEEKS Over a two-week period, one can sing all 150 psalms during the Divine Office. To do this, they are split between
odd weeks and even weeks. When the previous Sunday is an odd number (1st week in Lent, 3rd week in Easter, 21st week
after Pentecost), the odd-week cycle is used. If the previous Sunday is an even number, then the even-week cycle is used.
EVEN WEEKS PSALM SCHEDULE Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat VIGILS 56 26 8 29 37 70 107 49 13 19 30 52 71 61 79 17
45 31 11 75 75 83 55 46 34 105 82 81 142 109 48 66 94 144 140 72 LAUDS 51 1o 3 39 86 63 40 118 36 57 65 32 92 143 150
116 146 147 90 148 149 TERCE 119, xn-xv 120, 121, 122 EVES WEEKS PSALM SCHEDULE CONTINUED Sun Mon Tue
Wed Thu Fri Sal SEXT 123 129 123 129 123 129 119. 124 130 124 130 124 130 XVI-XVIll 125 131 125 131 128 131 NONE 126
126 126 119. 127 132 127 132 127 132 X1X-XXII 128 133 128 133 128 133 VESPERS 110 20 135 33 24 2 21 104 141 41 69
85 47 96 97 98 99 100 23 COMPLINE 4 and 91 ODD WEEKS PSALM SCHEDULE Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fh Sat VIGILS 58 1
14 78 59 72 18 35 44 12 60 3 80 25 54 62 42 137 7 85 27 15 77 43 144 16 87 28 106 139 84 145 89 103 99 Reading the
Psalms with Luther ODD WEEKS PSALM SCHEDULE CONTINUED Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat LA UDS 51 50 73 102 101
6 38 118 5 43 64 88 76 143 150 111 112 116 114 115 113 TERCE 119, MV 120, 121, 122 SEXT 119, 123 129 123 129 123 129
124 130 124 130 124 130 V-VII 125 131 125 131 125 131 NONE 126 126 126 119, 127 132 127 132 127 132 VII-XI 128 133
128 133 128 133 VESPERS 110 20 46 45 2 21 68 136 9 22 138 47 96 97 98 98 93 24 COMPLINE 4 and 91 c 960 Reading the
Psalms with Luther Psalms Saturday Sunday Monday Tuesday .ADVENT 1 Morning 24, iso 122, 145 33,146 Evening 80. 72 25
no 40 67 65 94 CHRISTMAS MornmgPrayer Evening Prayer December 24 102, 144 Dec ember 25 2, Laudale 98,96 December
26 116, Laudale 119:1-24,27 Dei ember 27 34, Laudale 19. 121 December 2d 2. Laudale 110, 11 Dec ember 29 96. Laudale
132. 97 December JO 93, Laudale 89:1-18, 89:19-52 LENT Morning Evening 31, 143 84. 150 42. 32 119:73-80 121, 6 34, 146
25, 91 EASTER Moming Evening 23. 114 93, 150 136, 117 97, 145 124, 115 t 98. 146 66 116 GENERAL Week 1 Moming
Evening 1-4 5-8 9-11 12-16 17, 18 19-21 22-24 Week 2 Morning Evening 46-49 50-53 54-56 57-60 61-64 65-67 68 Week 3
Moming Evening 86-88 89 90-92 93. 94, 96 97-101 102, 103 104 Week 4 Moming Evening 119:1-32 119:33-64 119 65-96 119
97-136 119 137-176 120-124 125-129 ,y5? for Daily Prayer Wednesday Thursday SO 18.1-20 S3. 17 136. 62 MorningPrayer
December .i 1 98. Ltudtle Januun 1 98. Itudatt Januun 2 48. Laudate Januurx .? 111. taudaie January 4 20. Ltudtte Junuurx 5
99. Uudste Januun 6 72, Uudate S. 147 1-12 27. 147 13-21 27. 51 126. 102 99. 137 1-21 47. 147 13-21 9. 118 68. 113 25-27
31-33 28-30 34-36 69 73. 74 70-72 75-77 10S 107. 108 106 1 109. 110 130-133 136-138 134-125 139-142 Friday Saturday
102. 148 130. 16 90. 149 Evening Prayer 45. 96 99 8 9. 29 107. 15 93. 97 96. 110 100. 76 22.148 105, 130 43.149 96, 148 49.
1 38 92. 149 37. 38 39-42 43-45 78 79-81 82-85 111-114 115-117 118 143-145 146. 147 148-150 I